




Transcriber’s Notes:

  Underscores “_” before and after a word or phrase indicate _italics_
    in the original text.
  Small capitals have been converted to SOLID capitals.
  Old or antiquated spellings have been preserved.
  Typographical and punctuation errors have been silently corrected.
  Where double quotes have been repeated at the beginnings of
    consecutive stanzas, they have been omitted for clarity.




TANNHÄUSER




                    XVI
    One is incisive, corrosive;
      Two retorts, nettled, curt, crepitant;
    Three makes rejoinder, expansive, explosive;
      Four overbears them all, strident and strepitant:
    Five ... O Danaides, O Sieve!

                    XVII
    Now, they ply axes and crowbars;
      Now, they prick pins at a tissue
    Fine as a skein of the casuist Escobar’s
      Worked on the bone of a lie. To what issue?
    Where is our gain at the Two-bars?

                   XVIII
   _Est fuga, volvitur rota._
      On we drift: where looms the dim port?
    One, Two, Three, Four, Five, contribute their quota;
      Something is gained, if one caught but the import—
    Show it us, Hughes of Saxe-Gotha!

              R. BROWNING, _Master Hughes of Saxe-Gotha_




                              TANNHÄUSER
                          A STORY OF ALL TIME

                                  BY
                           ALEISTER CROWLEY

                            [Illustration]

                            _A New Edition
                        Price Fifteen Shillings
                           net to the trade_

                    SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF
                            RELIGIOUS TRUTH
                     BOLESKINE, FOYERS, INVERNESS
                                 1907

                         _All Rights Reserved_




DEDICATION


    I shall not tell thee that I love thee!
      Nay! by the Star in Heaven burning,
      Its ray to me at midnight turning
    To tell me that it beams above thee—
      Nay! though thou wert, as I am, yearning,
    I should not tell thee that I love thee!

    I know what secret thought once blossomed
      Into a blush that seemed a kiss,
      Some swift suppressed extreme of bliss
    In thy most fearful sigh embosomed.
      What oracle should prate of this?
    I know the secret thought that blossomed!

    Extol the truth of love’s disdain!
      Love, daring by no glance to gladden
      A heart that waits but that to madden
    In purple pleasure plucked of pain.
      Nay! let our tears, that fail to sadden,
    Extol the truth of love’s disdain!

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let deeper silence shield the deeper rapture!
      Hardly our eyes reveal the inward bliss,
      Sealed by no speech and shadowed by no kiss.
    Love is no wizard to elude recapture
      In the strong prison of his silences!
    Let deeper silence shield the deeper rapture!

    Twin souls are we, to one Star bound in Heaven!
      Twin souls on earth by earthly bars divided!
      But, did thy spirit glide as mine has glided
    Straight to That Star—no rose-leaves ask to leaven
      The manna that the Moon of Love provided!
    Twin souls are we, to one Star bound in Heaven!

    Not to thy presence in the veil and vision
      Of solemn lies that men miscall the world;
      Not to thy mind the lightnings truthward hurled
    I turn. I laugh dead distance to derision!—
      Spirit to spirit: there our loves are curled,
    Not to thy presence in the veil and vision!

    Beyond the gold and glamour of Life’s lotus,
      The flower that falls from this our stronger sight,
      We dwell, eternal shapes of shadowy light.
    Only the love on earth that shook and smote us
      Begets new stars—truth’s flowers fallen through night
    Beyond the gold and glamour of Life’s lotus!

    Eternal bliss of Love in birthless bowers!
      Light, the gemmed robes of Love! Life, lifted breath,
      Ageless existence deifying death!
    Love, the sole flower beyond these lesser flowers!—
      In thee at last the live fruit quickeneth?
    Eternal bliss of Love in birthless bowers!

       *       *       *       *       *

    There, secret! Know it! Now forget!
      Betray not Wisdom unto Folly!
      Less sweet is Joy than Melancholy!—
    Why should our eyes for this be wet?
      Enough: be silent and be holy!
    There, secret! Know it! Now forget!

    Now I have told thee that I love thee!
      To me our Star in Heaven burning
      Tells me thy heart as mine is yearning;
    Tells me Love’s fragrance stolen above thee
      Thy soul to mine at last is turning
    Now I have told thee that I love thee!




PREFACE


As, after long observation and careful study, the biologist sees that
what at first seemed isolated and arbitrary acts are really part
of a series of regular changes, and presently has the life-history
of the being that he is examining clear from Alpha to Omega in his
mind; as, during a battle, the relative importance of its various
incidents is lost, the more so owing to the excitement and activity
of the combatant, and to the fact that he is himself involved in the
vicissitudes which he may have set himself to observe; while even
for the commander, though the smoke-pall may lift now and again to
show some brilliant charge or desperate hand-to-hand struggle, he may
fail to grasp its significance in his dispositions; or indeed find
it to be quite unexpected and foreign to his calculations; yet a few
years or months later the same battle may be lucidly, tersely, and
connectedly described, so that a child is able to follow its varying
fortunes with delight and comprehension: just so has my own observation
of a life-history more subtle, a battle more terrible, been at last
co-ordinated: I can view the long struggle from a standpoint altogether
complete, calm, and philosophical; and the result of this review is the
present story of Tannhäuser, just as the isolated and often apparently
contradictory incidents of the fight were recorded in that jungle
of chaotic emotions which I printed under the title of “The Soul of
Osiris,” calling it a history so that my readers might discover for
themselves (if they chose to take the trouble) the real continuity in
the apparent disjointedness.

The history of any man who seriously and desperately dares to force a
passage into the penetralia of nature; not with the calm philosophy
of the scientist, but with the burning conviction that his immortal
destiny is at stake; must be a strange one: to me at least strangely
attractive. The constant illusions; the many disappointments; the
bitter earnestness of the man amid the grim humour, or more often
sheer cacchination of his surroundings; all the bestial mockery of the
baffling fiends; the still more hideous mockery in which the Powers of
Good themselves seem to indulge; doubt of the reality of that which he
seeks; doubt even of the seeker; the irony of the whole strife: are
fascinating to me as they are, I make no doubt, to the majority of
mankind.

This is the subtler form of that mental bewilderment which the Greek
Tragedians were so fond of depicting; as subtle in effect, yet grosser
in its determining factors. For we are thus changed from the times of
Sophocles and Euripides; that the fixed ideas of morality and religion
which they employed as the motives of pathos or of horror are now
shattered. Ibsen, otherwise in spirit and style purely Greek,
and dealing as the Greeks did with the emotions of the soul, has
realised the changed and infinitely more complex conditions of life;
our self-appointed spiritual guides notwithstanding, or, rather,
withstanding in vain. Consequently it is impossible any more to
divine whether virtue or vice (as understood of old) will cause the
irreparable catastrophe which is the one element of drama which we may
still (in the work of a modern dramatist) await with any degree of
confidence.

I trust that I may be forgiven for adopting the idea that Tannhäuser
was one of those mysterious Germans whose reputed existence so
perturbed the Middle Ages; in short, a Rosicrucian. Some people may
be surprised that a Member of that illustrious but unhappy fraternity
should take cognizance of what my friend Bhikku Ananda Mîtriya calls
“hog-nosed Egyptian deities,” still more that he should show reverence
to symbols like the B. V. M. and the Holy Grail. But the most learned
and profound students of the Mysteries of the Rosy Cross assure me that
it was the special excellence of these mystics that they declined to
be bound down by any particular system in their sublime search for the
Eternal and the Real.

Under these circumstances I have not scrupled to subvert anything
that appeared to me to need subverting in the interests, always
identical, of beauty and of truth. Anachronism may be found piled upon
anachronism, and symbolism mixed with symbolism.

In one direction I have restrained myself. Nowhere does Tannhäuser
refer to the Vedas and Shastras or to the Dhamma of that blameless
hypochondriac, Gotama Buddha. I take all the blame for so important an
omission, not without a shrewd suspicion that the commination will take
the form of “For this relief much thanks!”

The particular object that I have in view in speaking both in Hebrew
and Egypto-Christian symbology is that by this means I may familiarise
my readers with the one thing of any importance that life, travel, and
study have taught me, to wit: the Origin of Religions.

I take it that there have always, or nearly always, been on the
earth those whom Councillor von Eckartshäusen, the Svámi Vivekánanda
and their like, call “great spiritual giants” (can there be any
etymological link between “yogi” and “ogre”?) and that such persons,
themselves perceiving Truth, have tried to “diminish the message
to the dog” for the benefit of less exalted minds, and hidden that
Truth (which, unveiled, would but blind men with its glory) in a mass
of symbology often perverted or grotesque, yet to the proper man
transparent; a “bait of falsehood to catch the carp of truth.” Now,
regarded in this light, all religions, quá religions, are equally
contemptible. The Hindu Gnanis say “That which can be thought is not
true.” As machineries for the exercise of spiritual and intellectual
powers innate or developed, certain sets of symbols may be more or less
convenient to a special trend of mind, reason, or imagination; no more:
I deny to any one religion the possession of any essential truth which
is not also formulated (though in a different language) in every other.
To this rule Buddhism appears a solitary exception. Whether it is truly
so I have hardly yet decided: the answer depends upon certain recondite
mathematical considerations, to discuss which would be foreign to
the scope of my present purpose, but which I hope to advance in a
subsequent volume.

If you do not accept my conclusion that all religions are the
expression of truth under different aspects, facets of the same
intolerable gem, you are forced back on the conclusions of those
unpleasing persons the Phallicists. But should you travel to the East,
and tell a Lingam-worshipping Sivite that his is a phallic worship he
will not be pleased with you. Compare on this point Arnold, “India
Revisited,” 1886, p. 112.

So much for the symbology of this, I fear, much-mangled drama. Drama
indeed is an altogether misleading term; monodrama is perhaps better.
It is really a series of introspective studies; not necessarily
a series in time, but in psychology, and that rather the morbid
psychology of the Adept than the gross mentality of the ordinary man.

It may help some of my readers if I say that my Tannhäuser is nearly
identical in scheme with the “Pilgrim’s Progress.” Literary and
spiritual experts will however readily detect minor differences in the
treatment. It will be sufficient if I state that “the Unknown,” whether
minstrel, pilgrim, or Egyptian sage, represents Tannhäuser in his true
Self,—the “Only Being in an Abyss of Light!” The Tannhäuser who talks
is the “Only Being in an Abyss of Darkness,” the natural man ignorant
of his identity with the Supreme Being. The various other characters
are all little parts of Tannhäuser’s own consciousness and not real
persons at all: whether good or bad, all alike hinder and help (and
there is not one whose function is not thus double) the realisation
of his true unity with all life. This circumstance serves to explain,
though perhaps not to excuse, the lack of dramatic action in the story.
Love being throughout the symbol of his method, as Beauty of its
object, it is through Love, refined into Pity, that he at last attains
the Supreme Knowledge, or at least sufficient of it to put the last
straw on the back of his corporeal camel, and bring the story to a
fitting end.

To pass to more mundane affairs. I may mention for the benefit of those
who may not be read in certain classes of literature, and so think me
original when I am hardly even paraphrasing, that Tannhäuser’s songs in
Act IV. are partly adapted from the so-called “Oracles of Zoroaster,”
partly from the mysterious utterances of the great angel Avé, perhaps
equally spurious. Of course Bertram’s song is merely a rather free
adaptation of the two principal fragments of Sappho, which so many
people have failed to translate that one can feel no shame in making
yet another attempt. There may be one or two conscious plagiarisms
besides, for which I do not apologise. For any unconscious ones which
may have crept in owing to my prolonged absence from civilized parts,
and the consequent lack of opportunity for reference and comparison, I
emphatically do.

One word to the reviewers. It must not be taken as ungracious if
I so speak. From nearly all I have received the utmost justice,
kindness, and consideration: two or three only seem to take delight
in deliberately perverting the sense of my remarks: and to them, for
their own sake, I now address these words of elementary instruction.
You are perfectly welcome to do with my work in its entirety what
Laertes did with his allegiance and his vows: but do not pick out and
gloat over a few isolated passages from the Venusberg scenes and call
me a sensualist, nor from the Fourth Act and groan “Mysticism!”; do not
quote “Two is by shape the Coptic Aspirate” as a sample of my utmost
in lyrics; do not take the song of Wolfram as my best work in either
sentiment or melody. As a _quid pro quo_ I give you all full
permission to conclude your review of this book by quoting from Act
III. “Forget this nightmare!”

I must express my great sense of gratitude to Oscar Eckenstein, Gerald
Kelly, and Allan MacGregor, who have severally helped me in the work of
revision, which has extended over more than a year of time and nearly
twenty thousand miles of space. Some few of the very best lines were
partially or wholly suggested by themselves, and I have not scrupled
to incorporate these: if the book be but a Book, the actual authorship
seems to me immaterial.

I have written this preface in lighter vein, but I hope that no one
will be led to suppose that my purpose is anything but deadly serious.
This poem has been written in the blood of slain faith and hope; each
foolish utterance of Tannhäuser stings me with shame and memory of old
agony; each Ignis Fatuus that he so readily pursues, reminds me of
my own delusions. But, these follies and delusions being the common
property of mankind, I have thought them of sufficient interest,
dramatic and philosophical, to form the basis of a poem. Let no man
dare to reproach me with posing as the hero of my tale. I fall back
on the last utterance of Tannhäuser himself “I say, then, ‘I’: and
yet it is not ‘I’ Distinct, but ‘I’ incorporate in All.” Above all,
pray understand that I do not pose as a teacher. I am but an asker of
questions, such as may be found confronting those who have indeed freed
their minds from the conventional commonplaces of the platitudinous,
but have not yet dared to uproot the mass of their convictions, and to
examine the whole question of religion from its most fundamental source
in the consciousness of mankind. Such persons may find the reasoning of
Tannhäuser useful, if only to brace them to a more courageous attempt
to understand the “Great Arcanum,” and to attain at last, no matter at
what cost, to “true Wisdom and perfect Happiness.” So may all happen!

                           KANDY, CEYLON, _Sept._ 1901.




TANNHÄUSER


                       PERSONS CONCERNED

                       THE WORLD OF GODS.
                ISIS.
                HATHOÖR.

                        THE WORLD OF MEN.
                TANNHÄUSER.
                ELIZABETH.
                AN UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
                THE LANDGRAVE.
                WOLFRAM,     }
                BERTRAM,     } _At the Court of the Landgrave_.
                HEINRICH,    }
                A SHEPHERD-BOY.
                PILGRIMS, FORESTERS, COURTIERS, ETC.


                       THE WORLD OF DEMONS.
                THE EVIL AND AVERSE HATHOÖR, CALLED VENUS.




ACT I.


  “Therefore we are carefully to proceed in Magic, lest that Syrens
  and other monsters deceive us, which likewise do desire the society
  of the human soul.”
                                 _Arbatel of Magic. Aphorism 35._

_A lonely and desolate plain. Tannhäuser riding towards a great
mountain._

                TANNHÄUSER.
    Six days. Creation took no longer! Yet
      I wander eastward, and no light is found.
    The stars their motion shirk, or else forget.
      The sun—the moon? Imprisoned underground!
      Where gnomes disport, and devils do abound.

    Six days. I journey to the black unknown,
      Always in hope the Infinite may rise
    Some unexpected instant, as ’twere grown
      A magic palace to enchanted eyes;
      A wizard guerdon for a minstrel wise.

    Perhaps I am a fool to think that here,
      Merely by rending Nature’s hollow veil,
    I may attain the Solitary Sphere,
      Achieve the Path; or, haply, if I fail,
      Gain the Elixir, or behold the Grail.

    I seek the mystery of Life and Time,
      The Key of all that is not and that is,
    And that which—climb, imagination! climb!—
      Transcends them both—the mystical abyss
      Where Mind and Being marry, and are Bliss.

    So have I journeyed—like a fool! Ah, well!
      Let pass self-scorn, as love of self is past!
    But—am I further forward? Who can tell?
      God is the Complex as the Protoplast:
      He is the First (not “was”), and is the Last

    (Not “will be”). Then why travel? To what end?
      What is the symbol I am set to find?
    What is that burning heart of blood to spend
      Caught in a sunset with the night behind,
      The Grail of God? I would that I were blind!

    I would that I were desolate and dumb,
      Naked and poor! That He might manifest
    A crimson glory subtly caught and come,
      An opal crucible of Alkahest!
      And yet—what gain of vital gold expressed?

    This were my guerdon: to fade utterly
      Into the rose-heart of that sanguine vase,
    And lose my purpose in its silent sea,
      And lose my life, and find my life, and pass
      Up to the sea that is as molten glass.

    I mind me of that old Egyptian,
      Met where Aurora streamed her rainbow hair,
    Who called me from the quest. An holy man!
      A crown of light scintillant in the air
      Shone over him: he bade me not despair.

    “The Blood of the Osiris” was his word:
      (Meaning the Christ?) “The life, the tears, the tomb!
    The Love of Isis is its name!” (I heard
      This for the love of Mary.) In her womb
      Brews the Elixir, and the roses bloom.

    For the Three Maries (so he said) were One:
      Three aspects of the mystic spouse of God,
    Isis! This pagan! “Look towards the Sun”
      (Quoth he) “And seek a winepress to be trod;
      With Beauty girdled, garlanded, and shod.”

    “Thus,” riddled he, “thy heart shall know its Peace!”
      Let be! I ride upon the sand instead,
    Look to the Cross, whereon I take mine ease!
      Let be! Just so the Roman soldier said.
      Esaias? He is dead—as I am dead!

    What was his symbol and his riddle’s key?
      Go, seek the stars and count them and explore!
    Go, sift the sands beyond a starless sea!
      So, find an answer where the dismal shore
      Of time beats back eternity! No more!

    Let me ride on more hastily than this,
      That so my body may be tired of me,
    And fling me to the old forgetful kiss,
      Sleep’s, when my mind goes, riderless and free,
      Into some corner of eternity.

    Alas! that mind returns from its abode
      With newer problems, fiercer thoughts! But stay!
    Suppose it came not? It must be with God!—
      Then this dull house of gold and iron and clay
      Is happy also—’tis an easy way!

    So easy, I am fearful of mishap.
      Some fatal argument the God must find
    That linked us first. The dice are in His lap—
      Let Him decide in His imperial mind!
      My choice; to see entirely—and be blind!

    Yet I bethink me of that holy man,
      (Pagan albeit) my stirrup’s wisdom-share:
    “Learn this from Thothmes the Egyptian.
      Use only in thine uttermost despair!”
      He whispered me a Word. “Beware! Beware!”

    “Two voices are there in the sullen sea;
      Two functions hath the inevitable fire;
     Earthquake hath earth, and yet fertility:
      See to thy purpose, and thy set desire!
      Else, dire the fate—the ultimation dire!”

    Vague threats and foolish words! Quite meaningless
      The empty sounds he muttered in mine ear.
    Why should their silly mystery impress
      My thoughtful forehead with the lines of fear?
      (This riding saps my courage as my cheer.)

    Still, I must see his symbol of the Sun,
      The Winepress, and the Beauty! Puerile
    And pagan to that old mysterious one,
      The awful Light and the anointed Vial,
      The Dawning of the Blood, even as a smile:—

    Even as a smile on Beauty’s burning cheek—
      Ha! In a circle? As this journey is?
    How vain is man’s imagining and weak!
      Begod my lady, and my lady’s kiss?
      Back swing we to the pitiful abyss.

    Liken God’s being to the life of man.
      So reason staggers. Angels, answer me!
    Ye who have watched the far unfolding plan—
      How is time shorter than eternity?
      Prove it and weigh! By mind it cannot be.

    All our divisions spring in our own brain.
      See! As upsprings on the horizon there
    A clefted hill contemptuous of the plain.
      (Why, which is higher?) I am in despair.
      Let me essay the Pharaoh and his prayer!
            [_Tannhäuser speaks the Word of Double Power._

    Oh God, Thy blinding beauty, and the light
    Shed from Thy shoulders, and the golden night
    Of mingling fire and stars and roses swart
    In the long flame of hair that leaps athwart,
    Live in each tingling gossamer! Dread eyes!
    Each flings its arrow of sharp sacrifice,
    Eating me up with poison! I am hurled
    Far through the vaporous confines of the world
    With agony of sundering sense, beholding
    Thy mighty flower, blood-coloured death, unfolding!
    Lithe limbs and supple shoulders and lips curled,
    Curled out to draw me to their monstrous world!
    Warm breasts that glow with light ephemeral
    And move with passionate music to enthrall,
    To charm, to enchant, to seal the entrancing breath.
    I fall! Stop! Spare me!—Slay me!
                [_Tannhäuser enters into an ecstasy._
                                    This is death.

    [_The evil and averse Hathoör, or Venus, who hath
        arisen in the place of the Great Goddess, lifteth
        up her voice and chanteth_:—

                   VENUS.
      Isis am I, and from my life are fed
        All showers and suns, all moons that wax and wane,
      All stars and streams, the living and the dead,
        The mystery of pleasure and of pain.
      I am the mother! I the speaking sea!
      I am the earth and its fertility!
    Life, death, love, hatred, light, darkness, return to me—
      To me!

      Hathoör am I, and to my beauty drawn
        All glories of the Universe bow down,
      The blossom and the mountain and the dawn,
        Fruit’s blush, and woman, our creation’s crown.
      I am the priest, the sacrifice, the shrine,
      I am the love and life of the divine!
    Life, death, love, hatred, light, darkness are surely mine—
      Are mine!

      Venus am I, the love and light of earth,
        The wealth of kisses, the delight of tears,
      The barren pleasure never come to birth,
        The endless, infinite desire of years.
      I am the shrine at which thy long desire
      Devoured thee with intolerable fire.
    I was song, music, passion, death, upon thy lyre—
      Thy lyre!

      I am the Grail and I the Glory now:
        I am the flame and fuel of thy breast;
      I am the star of God upon thy brow;
        I am thy queen, enraptured and possessed.
      Hide thee, sweet river; welcome to the sea,
      Ocean of love that shall encompass thee!
    Life, death, love, hatred, light, darkness, return to me—
      To me!

    [_Tannhäuser perceives that he is in the palace of a
        Great Queen._

    Rise, rise, my knight! My king! My love, arise!
    See the grave avenues of Paradise,
    The dewy larches bending at my breath,
    Portentous cedars prophesying death!
    See the long vistas and the dancing sea,
    The measured motion of fecundity!
    Bright winds set swaying the soft-sounding flowers
    (Here flowers have music) in my woven bowers,
    Where sweet birds blossom, and in chorus quire
    The rapt beginnings of immense desire.
    Here is the light and rapture of the will:
    We touch the stars—and they are tiny still!
    O mighty thews! O godlike face and hair!
    Rise up and take me; ay, and keep me there,
    One tingle at thy touch from head to feet;
    Lips that cling close, and never seem to meet,
    Melting as sunlight melts in wine! Arise!
    Shame! Has thy learning left thee overwise?
    Thy lips sing fondly—to another tune.
    Nay! ’twas my breathing beauty made thee swoon,
    Dread forkéd fire across the cloven sky;
    Stripped off thy body of mortality—
    Nay, but on steeper slopes my love shall strive!
    Our bodies perish and our hearts revive
    Vainly, unless the shaking sense beware
    The crested snakes shot trembling through our hair,
    Their wisdom! But our souls leap, flash, unite,
    One crownéd column of avenging light,
    Fixed and yet floating, infinite, immense,
    Caught in the meshes of the cruel sense,
    Two kissing breaths of agony and pleasure,
    Mixed, crowned, divided, beyond age or measure,
    Time, thought, or being! Now thine eyes awake,
    Droop at my kisses; the long lashes slake
    Their sleek and silky thirst in tears of light!
    Thine eyes! They burn me, even me! They smite
    Me who am scatheless, and a flame of fire.
    See, in our sorrow and intense desire
    All worlds are caught and sealed! The stars are taken
    In love’s weak web, and gathered up, and shaken!
    Our word is mighty on the magic moon!
    The sun resurges to our triple tune!
    (See, it is done!) O chosen of the Christ!
    My knight, and king, and lover, wast thou priced,
    A portion in the all-pervading bliss,
    Thou, whom I value at my ageless kiss?
    Chosen of Me! Thou heart of hearts, thou mine,
    Man! Stamping into dust the Soul Divine
    By might of that mere Manhood! Sense and thought
    Reel for the glory of thee kissed and caught
    In the eternal circle of my arms!
    Woven in vain are the mysterious charms
    Endymion taught Diana! For one gaze;
    One word of my unutterable praise;
    And I was utterly and ever lost,
    Lost in the whirlwind of thy love, and tossed
    A wreck on its irremeable sea!
    Life! Life! This kiss! Draw in thy breath! To me!
    To me!                  [_Tannhäuser is lost._




ACT II.


    “But a moment’s thought is passion’s passing bell.”
                                      —KEATS, _Lamia_.

             _In Venusberg._

                 VENUS.
    Sweet, sweet are May and June, dear,
      The loves of lambent spring,
    Our lamp the drooping moon, dear,
      Our roof, the stars that sing;
    The bed, of moss and roses;
      The night, as long as death!
      Still, breath!
    Life wakens and reposes,
      Love ever quickeneth!

    Sweet, sweet, when Lion and Maiden,
      The motley months of gold,
    Swoop down with sunlight laden,
      And eyes are bright and bold.
        Life-swelling breasts uncover
      Their warm involving deep—
      Love, sleep!—
    And lover lies with lover
      On air’s substantial steep.

          TANNHÄUSER.
    Ah! sweeter was September—
      The amber rain of leaves,
    The harvest to remember,
      The load of sunny sheaves.
    In gardens deeply scented,
      In orchards heavily hung,
      Love flung
    Away the days demented
      With lips that curled and clung.

    Ah! Sweeter still October,
      When russet leaves go grey,
    And sombre loves and sober
      Make twilight of the day.
    Dark dreams and shadows tenser
      Throb through the vital scroll,
      Man’s soul,
    Lift, shake the subtle censer
      That hides the cruel coal!

    Still sweeter when the Bowman
      His silky shaft of frost
    Lets loose on earth, that no man
      May linger nor be lost.
    The barren woods, deserted,
      Lose echo of our sighs—
      Love—dies?—
    Love lives—in granite skirted,
      And under oaken skies.

    But best is grim December,
      The Goatish God his power;
    The Satyr blows the ember,
      And pain is passion’s flower;
    When blood drips over kisses,
      And madness sobs through wine:—
      Ah, mine!—
    The snake starts up and hisses
      And strikes and—I am thine!

             VENUS.
    Those are thy true joys? Cruelty for love?

           TANNHÄUSER.
    And death in kissing. How I have despised,
    Riding through meadows of the rushing Rhine,
    To watch the gentle foresters of spring
    Crush dainty violets in their dalliance,
    Laughing in chorus with the birds; and then
    (Coming at harvest time upon my tracks)
    See these same lovers in the golden sheaves
    Under the sun. The same, the fuller fruit,
    Say you? But somehow, nearer to the end,
    Lost the old sense of mystery, and lost
    That curious reverence in sacrilege
    With Wonder—the child’s faculty! Less joy,
    Less laughter, yes! that symptom I approve;
    Yet is that subtle fading-out of smiles
    Rather the coming of a dull despair,
    And not at all that keen despair, that sharp
    Maddening pain that should torment a man
    With deadliest delight, the self-same hour
    That he unveils the Isis of desire.
    These little lovers strip their maidens bare,
    And find them—naked! Poor and pitiful!
    Look at our love instead! I raised Thy veil,
    Nay, tore Thy vesture from Thee, and behold!
    Then only did I see what mystery,
    What ninefold forest, shade impassible,
    Surrounds Thy heart, as with a core of light
    Shut in the mystery of a dead world.
    Thou formless sense of gloom and terror! Thou
    Upas, new tree of life—by sinister
    Cherubim with averted faces kept!
    Nay! This one secret I suspect, and gloat
    Over the solemn purport of the dream
    With subtle shuddering of joy,—and that
    Keener delight, a sense of deadly fear!
    This secret: Thou art darkness in Thyself,
    And evil wrapped in light, and ugliness
    Vested in beauty! Therefore is my love
    No petty passion like these country-folk’s:
    No fertile glory (as the Love of God):
    But vast and barren as the winter sea,
    Holding I know not what enormous soul
    In its salt bitter bosom, underneath
    The iron waters and the serpent foam;
    Below, where sight and sound are set no more,
    But only the intolerable weight
    Of its own gloomy selfhood. This am I:
    This passion, lion-mouthed and adder-eyed.
    A mass compressed, a glowing central core,
    Like molten metal in the crucible!
    Death’s secret is some sweetness ultimate,
    Sweeter than poison. Ah! My very words,
    Chance phrases, ravel out the tale for me—
    Sweetness and death—poison and love. Consider
    How this same striving to the Infinite,
    Which I intend by “love,” is likest to
    That journey’s wonder to the womb of death:
    Because no soul of man has ever crossed
    Again that River—the old fable’s wrong;
    Æneas came never to the ghostly side!
    Was not the boat weighed with his body still?
    Felt he the keen emotions of the dead?
    Could he, the mortal and the warrior,
    Converse with Them, and understand? Believe!
    No soul has crossed in utter sympathy
    And yet returned; because of this decree:
    No man can look upon the face of God!
    Yet Moses looked upon His hinder parts,
    And I—yes, goddess! in this passionate
    Life in our secret mountain, well I know
    Thy beauty, and Thy love, (although they be
    Infinite, far beyond the mortal mind,
    Body, or soul to touch, to comprehend,
    And dwell in) that the utter intimate
    Knowledge of Thee, if once I ravelled out
    Thy secret, laid Thee naked to the bone—
    Nay, to the marrow! were to come, aware,
    Face to face full with deity itself.
    And this I strive at! Therefore is my love
    Wholly in tune with that concealed desire
    Bred in each mortal, though he never know,
    (Few do know) to transcend the bound of things,
    And find in Death the purpose of this life.

               VENUS.
    Yes, there you tear one veil away from me!
    Yet, am not I the willing one? Indeed
    I feel the wonder of that same desire
    From mine own side of the Impassible.
    See then how equal God and man are made!
    For I have clothed me in the veil of flesh,
    And strive toward thy finite consciousness
    As thou art reaching to my infinite,
    Nurturing my Godhead at the breast of Sin
    With milk of fleshly stings—even to pain:—

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I see, I see the Christian mystery!
    That was the purpose of High God Himself,
    Clothed in the Christ! Ah! Triumphed He at last?
    Nay, not in death! The slave—He rose again!
    Alas! Alas!

               VENUS.
                Alas indeed, my knight!
    We love not! Being both enamoured of
    Just the one thing that is impossible.
    But in this carnal strife the Intimate
    Achieves for one snatched swiftness. Kiss me, love!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Ah, but the waking! As I sink to sleep
    Pillowed in nuptial arms—so fresh and cool—
    (Yet in their veins I know the fire that runs
    Racing and maddening from the crown of flame,
    The monolithic core of mystical
    Red fury that is called a woman’s heart)
    Sinking, I say, from the supreme embrace,
    The Good-night kisses; sinking into sleep—
    What dreams betoken the dread solitude?

               VENUS.
    What dreams? Ah, dreamest not of me, my knight?
    Of vast caresses that include all worlds?
    Of transmutation into molten steel
    Fusing with my intolerable gold
    In the red crucible of alchemy,
    That is—of clay?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                      I dream of no such thing.
    But of Thy likeness have I often seen
    The vast presentment—formless, palpable,
    Breathing. Not breathing as we use the word,
    When life and spirit mingle in one breath,
    Slay passion in one kiss—breathing, I say,
    Differently from Thee!

               VENUS.
                      Explain, explain!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    As if were kindled into gold and fire
    The East!

               VENUS.
          The East!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                       As if a flowerless moss
    Suddenly broke in passionate primroses!

               VENUS.
    Violets, violets!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                     Or as if a man
    Lay in the fairest garden of the world,
    In the beginning: and grew suddenly
    A living soul at that caressing wind!

               VENUS.
    A living soul!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                So is Thy shade to me
    When sleep takes shape.

               VENUS.
                       She is mine enemy
    Hate her, O hate her, she will slay thy soul!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    And is my soul not slain within me now?
    Yet, I do hate her—in these waking hours.
    But in my sleep she grows upon the sense,
    A solitary lotus that pales forth
    In the wide seas of space and separateness.
    That radiance!—Amber-scented voice of light,
    Calling my name, ever, ever calling—

               VENUS.
    Answer that call—and thou art lost indeed!
    Wake thou thy spirit in this hateful sleep,
    Keeping the vision, rise, and spit on her!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Spit on Thy likeness? I who love Thee so?

               VENUS.
    Yes, yes: obey me! She will leave thee then.
    She hath assumed mine image!      [_Thunder._

            TANNHÄUSER.
                        What is that?

               VENUS.
    Mere thunder on the mountain top. Do this,
    And I will come in sleep, in sleep renew
    The carnal joys of day.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                        Hast Thou forgot?
    It is the fleshly I would flee!

               VENUS.
                           Forget?
    But I strive fleshwards. Let our sleep renew
    The endless struggle—and perhaps, for thee,
    For thee!—the veil may lift another fold.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Why dost Thou hate this vision?

               VENUS.
                       She would take
    Thee from these arms!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                        But she is beautiful
    With Thine own beauty: yet as if the God
    Cancelled its mortal comeliness, and came
    More intimate than matter, closing in
    Keen on my spirit; as if all I sought
    In Thine own symbol, Beauty, were concealed
    Under her brows—how wider than the air!
    How deeper than the sea! How radiant
    Beyond the fire!

               VENUS.
                 O shun her devilish lures!
    That Beauty is the sole detested fear
    That can annul our conquests, and arouse
    Our rapt dream-kisses.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                       That is my intent.
    It is the spiritual life of things
    I seek—Thou knowest!

               VENUS.
                      Oh, I did not mean!
    Remember my dilemma! Hear me speak
    The story of her. She is a wicked witch
    That seeketh to delude thy sleepy sense
    In vicious purpose and malignant hope
    To ape my Godhead.      [_Thunder._

            TANNHÄUSER.
                    Thunder rolls again.
    I am uneasy.

               VENUS.
               Heed it not at all!
    May not my servants of the elements
    Play children’s gambols on the mountain crest
    About our fortress? Leave this idle talk!
    Come, in this sweet abandonment of self—
    Come, with this kiss I seal thy loyal oath
    To spit upon her!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                  Ah, you murder me!
                                  [_Sings._

       Come, love, and kiss my shoulders! Sleepy lies
       The tinted bosom whence its fire flies,
       The breathing life of thee, and swoons, and sighs,
       And dies!
       None but the dead can know the worth of love!

       Come, love, thy bosom to my heart recalls
       Strange festivals and subtle funerals.
       Soft passion rises in the amber walls,
       And falls!
       None but the dead can breathe the life of love!

       Come, love, thy lips, curved hollow as the moon’s!
       Bring me thy kisses, for the seawind tunes,
       The song that soars, and reads the starry runes,
       And swoons!
       None but the dead can tune the lyre of love!

       Come, love, thy body serpentine and bright!
       What love is this, the heart of sombre light,
       Impossible, and therefore infinite?
       Sheer height!
       None but the dead can twine the limbs of love.

       Come, love! My body in thy passion weeps
       Tears keen as dewfall’s, salter than the deep’s.
       My bosom! How its fortress wakes, and leaps,
       And sleeps!
       None but the dead can sleep the sleep of love!

       Come, love, caress me with endearing eyes!
       Light the long rapture that nor fades nor flies!
       Love laughs and lingers, frenzies, stabs, and sighs,
       And dies!
       None but the dead can know the worth of love!
                                       [_Tannhäuser sleeps._

               VENUS.
    Sleep on, poor fool, and in thy sleep forlorn
    Defy the very beauty that thou seekest!
    Now is the solemn portal of the dusk
    Lifted; and in the gleaming silver-gray,
    The eastern sky, steps out the single One,
    Hathoör and Aphrodite—whom I mock!
    I may not follow in the dimness—I
    Chained unto matter by my evil will,
    Delight of death and carnal life. But see!
    He stirs, as one beholding in a dream
    Some deadly serpent or foul basilisk
    Sunning its scales, called kingly, in the mire.
    Strike, O my lover! I will drag thee down
    Into mine own unending pain and hate
    To be one devil more upon the earth.—
    Come! ye my serpents, wrap his bosom round
    With your entangling leprosy! And me,
    Let me assume the belovéd limber shape,
    The crested head, the jewelled eyes of death,
    And sinuous sinewy glitter of serpenthood,
    That I may look once more into his face,
    And, kissing, kill him! Thus to hold him fast,
    Drawing his human spirit into mine
    For strength, for life, for poison! Ah, my God!
    These pangs, these torments! See! the sleeper wakes!
    I am triumphant! For he reaches out
    The sleepy arms, and turns the drowsy head
    To catch the dew dissolving of my lip.
    Wake, lover, wake! Thy Venus waits for thee!
    Draw back, look, hunger!—and thy mouth is mine.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    “Once I will shew Me waking. Destiny
    Adds one illusion to thee. Yet, Oh child!
    Yet will I not forsake thee; for thy soul,
    Its splendid self, hath known Me. Fare thee well.”

               VENUS.
    What are these strange and silly words? Awake!
    Wake and devour me with the dawn of love,
    The dragon to eclipse this moon of mine!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I sleep not. Those were Her mysterious words
    As faded the great vision. And I knew
    In some forgotten corner of my brain
    Some desperate truth.

               VENUS.
                 Forget this foolishness!
                               [_There cometh a shadow._
    I am afraid, even I! What moves me thus?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I saw the mighty vision as before
    Forming in front of the awakening east,
    All permeated with the rose of dawn,
    And pale with delicate green light and shade,
    Marvellous! So, you say, she is a witch
    Seeking to rob or trick you of your power?

               VENUS.
    I say so? No! I dare not! Oh forbear!

            TANNHÄUSER (_starts up_).
    There, there She comes in waking! Hail to Thee!
    I am afraid, I also, I myself!
    Help! lover, Venus, mistress of my life!
    I cannot bear the glory of the gaze.
    No man shall look upon the face of God!
    Where art thou? Save me from the scorpion!
    I am—alone!

              HATHOÖR.
                 Light, Truth, arise, arise!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I see—I see! All blinded by the Light—
    Thou art the Way, the Truth, the Life, the Love!
    Thou, Whom I sought through ages of deep sleep
    Forgotten when I died. There is no death:
    Change alternating; and forgetfulness
    Of one state in the other—easy truth
    I could not understand! Oh hear me, hear!
    Spare me the last illusion!—She is gone!

               VENUS.
    Save me, my knight! To thy sufficing arms
    I cling in this distress of womanhood!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Kiss me the last time.

               VENUS.
                     Whom have I but thee,
    Thee in the ages? Barren were my bliss
    And shorn my Godhead of eternal joy,
    Barred from thy kiss.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                       Call not thyself again
    Goddess. I saw thee in the Presence there.
    The scales are fallen, and mine eyes see clear.

               VENUS.
    Then you would leave me? Serpent if I were,
    My coils should press in dolorous delight
    Thy straining bosom, and my kiss were death!
    Death! Dost thou live, Tannhäuser? Sayest thou still:
    “None but the dead can know the worth of love!”?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Still. I am not in any sense estranged.
    I yearn for thee in the first hour of spring,
    As in the dying days of autumn. I
    Would clasp thee, as a child its mother’s throat,
    Drinking celestial wine from that dear mouth,
    Or with goodwill see poison in thy smile,
    And die, still kissing thee, and kissed again!
    This, though I saw thee crawl upon the earth,
    Howl at Her presence Whom thou wouldest ape,
    Thy tale reversed. I read that thunder now!
    This, though I know thee. Aphrodite, no!
    Nor Anael, nor Eva! Rather thou
    Lilith, the woman-serpent, she who sucks
    The breath of little children in their sleep,
    Strangles young maidens, and presides upon
    Sterile debauchery and unnatural loves.

               VENUS.
    Lilith! Ah lover! Thou hast known my name!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    So; yet I love thee! Rended is the veil!
    Calling thee Ugliness, I guessed aright,
    Who saw, and see, all Beauty in thee still.
    Only, a beauty risen out of Hell;
    Death and delusion—ay, corruption’s self,
    Wickedness sliming into impotence,
    Pleasure in putrefaction. But, in sleep,
    I will put off that evil as a clout
    Cast by a beggar.

               VENUS.
                  And the sore is left.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Oh, but this body, very consciousness!
    I banish both. I cross the crimson wall—
    My spirit shall reach up to and attain
    That other.

               VENUS.
             So Persephone must hold
    Thy life divided in Her dark domain.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Already I have tasted once of this
    In its own lesser way. Ten years ago
    I loved a maiden called Elizabeth.
    A child she was, so delicate and frail,
    Far, white, and lonely as the coldest star
    Set beyond gaze of any eye but God’s;
    And, to forget her, found due somnolence
    In such a warm brown bosom as thine own
    Is fire and amber. Then I came away:—
    I heard of knights no better horsed than I,
    No better sworded, with no gift of song,
    Who, caught by one ineffable desire,
    Rode on by old mysterious watersheds,
    Traversed strange seas, or battled with strange folk,
    Held vigil in wild forests, all to seek
    The vision of the Holy Grail. And I
    Rode forth on that same foolish wandering;
    And found a-many ventures on the way;
    At last an old Egyptian; who bestowed
    The magic word, which, when I had pronounced,
    Called up thine evil corpse-light in the sky.
    He riddled me—ah God! I see it now!
    The bloody winepress? The ascending sun?
    Thy dawning beauty and thine evil bed!
    The double meaning! I had evil thoughts
    When I pronounced it—else had She Herself,
    Hathoör or Mary, risen. Misery!
    Incessant mystery of the search for Truth!

               VENUS.
    Search out my mystery a little while!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    There is a flush of passion in thine eyes,
    An hunger in them; fascinate me now,
    My serpent-woman, drawing out my breath
    Into thy life, and mingling that in mine!
    See the rich blood that mantles to my touch,
    Invites the tooth to bite the shimmering skin,
    Till I could watch the ripe red venom flow
    Slow on the hills of amber, staining them
    Its own warm purple. Look, the tender stream!

               VENUS.
    Let its old sleepy fragrance lull thee now,
    Yet madden thee in brain and sense and soul,
    Mixing success with infinite despair.
    So; take our secret back to sleep with us:—
    And in that sleep I know that thou wilt choose
    The fact, and leave the dream, and so disdain
    These far-off splendours, catch the nearer joy,
    Take squalid kisses, banish crested love
    Intangible. Delights it thee, my friend,
    To reach the summits unattained before,
    And stumble on their snows? Thine old desire
    Was just to touch the mere impalpable.
    To formulate the formless. Otherwise
    Christ did as well—thine own words turn again!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Ah, if pure love could grow material!
    There are pure women!

               VENUS.
                    There you make me laugh!
    Remember—I have known such. But besides
    You ask hot snow and leaden feather-flights!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    And you—you keep me worrying, fair queen,
    In logic and its meshes, when to-day
    I rather would be caught in other nets,
    The burning gold and glory of your hair,
    Lightning and sunshine, storm and radiance,
    Your flaming pell!

               VENUS.
                  Come, sing to me again!
    That we may watch each other as you sing;
    Feel how it overmasters and o’erwhelms,
    The growing pang of hunger for a kiss!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Brood evil, then, in your amazing eyes,
    That I may see the serpent grow in you;
    As I were just the bird upon the bough—
    So let the twittering grow faint and still,
    And let me fall, fall into the abyss,
    Your arms—a culminating ecstasy,
    Darkness and death and rapture. Sing to you?
    What song? My tunes are played upon too oft.
    My first great cry of love inaudible
    Sapped me of music.

               VENUS.
                   Sing me that again!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Who is this maiden robéd for a bride,
      White shoulders and bright brows adorable,
    The flaming locks that clothe her, and abide,
      As God were bathing in the fire of Hell?
        They change, they grow, they shake
        As sunlight on the lake:
      They hiss, they glisten on her bosom bare.
        O maiden, maiden queen!
        The lightning flows between
      Thy mounting breasts, too magically fair.
        Draw me, O draw me to a dreaming death!
        Send out thine opiate breath,
    And lull me to the everlasting sleep,
      That, closing from the kisses of disdain
      To ecstasy of pain,
    I may sob out my life into their dangerous deep.
    Who cometh from the mountain as a tower
      Stalwart and set against the fiery foes?
    Who, breathing as a jasmine-laden bower?
      Who, crowned and lissome as a living rose?
        Sharp thorns in thee are set;
        In me, in me beget
    The dolorous despair of this desire.
        Thy body sways and swings
        Above the tide of things,
    Laps me as ocean, wraps me round as fire!
        Ye elemental sorceries of song,
        Surge, strenuous and strong,
    Seeking dead dreams, the secret of the shrine;
        So that she drain my life and being up
        As from a golden cup,
    To mingle in her blood, death’s kiss incarnadine.

    Who cometh from the ocean as a flower?
      Who blossometh above the barren sea?
    Thy lotus set beneath thee for a bower,
      Thine eyes awakened, lightened, fallen on me?
        O Goddess, queen, and wife!
        O Lady of my life!
    Who set thy stature as a wood to wave?
        Whose love begat thy limbs?
        Whose wave-washed body swims
    That nurtured thee, and found herself a grave?
        But thou, O thou, hast risen from the deep!
        All mortals mourn and weep
    To see thee, seeing that all love must die
        Beside thy beauty, see thee and despair!
        Deadly as thou art fair,
    I cry for all mankind—they are slain, even as I!

    [_Tannhäuser pauses, bends eagerly towards Venus.
           She smiling luxuriously, he continues._

    Who cometh wanton, with long arms outspread?
      Who cometh with lascivious lips aflame?
    Whose eyes invite me to the nakéd bed
      Stark open to the sun, dear pride of shame?
        Whose face draws close and near,
        Filling the soul with fear,
    Till nameless shudders course in every limb?
        Whose breath is quick and fierce?
        Whose teeth are keen to pierce
    The arms that clasp her? Whose the eyes that swim
        For dear and delicate delight? And whose
        The lips that halt and choose
    The very centre of my mouth, and meet
        In one supreme and conquering kiss, and cleave
        Unto the wound they leave,
    Bringing all heart’s blood to one house, too sore
        and sweet?
    Who rageth as a lioness bereaved,
      If, for a moment’s breathing space, I move
    Back from the purple where her bosom heaved,
      Back from the chosen body that I love?
        Whose lips cling faster still
        In desperate sweet will?
    Whose body melts as fire caught in wine
        Into the clasping soul?
        Whose breathing breasts control
    Her heart’s quick pulsing, and the sob of mine?
        O Venus, lady Venus, thou it is
        Whose fierce immortal kiss
    Abides upon me, about me, and within!
        Thou, lady of the secret of the Sea,
        Made one for love with me,
    Love and desire and dream, a sense of mortal sin!

    Who cometh as a visionary shape
      Within my soul and spirit to abide,
    Mysterious labyrinth without escape,
      Magical lover, and enchanted bride?
        O Mother of my will!
        Set thy live body still
    Unto my heart, that even Eternity
        Roll by our barren bed—
        That even the quick and dead,
    Being mortal, mix in our eternal sea!
        Distil we love from all the universe!
        Defy the early curse!
    Bid thorns and thistles mingle in delight!
        And from the athanor of death and pain
        Bring golden showers of rain
    To crown our bed withal, the empire of the Night!

    O Wife! Incarnate Beauty self-create!
      O Life! O Death! Love unimaginable!
    Despair grows hope, as hope grows desperate;
      And Heaven bridges the great gulf of Hell.
        Thy life is met with mine,
        Transmuted, grown divine,
    Even in this, the evil of the world!
        What agony is this,
        The first undying kiss
    From jewelled eyes and lips in passion curled?
        O sister and O serpent and O mate,
        Strike the red fang of hate
    Steady and strong, persistent to the heart!
        So shall this song be made more terrible
        With the soul-mastering spell,
    Choke, stagger, know the Evil, Beauty’s counterpart!

    Whose long-drawn curse runs venom in my veins?
      What dragon spouse consumes me with her breath?
    What passionate hatred, what infernal pains,
      Mixed with thy being in the womb of Death?
        Blistering fire runs,
        Scorching, terrific suns,
    Through body and soul in this abominable
        Marriage of demon power
        Subtle and strong and sour,
    A draught of ichor of the veins of Hell!
        Curses leap leprous, epicene, unclean,
        The soul of the Obscene
    Incarnate in the spirit: and above
        Hangs Sin, vast vampire, the corrupt, that swings
        Her unredeeming wings
    Over the world, and flaps for lust of Death—and Love!

               VENUS.
    This man was drained of music!
        Five new songs
    Chase the three ancient to oblivion! Oh!
    Love is grown fury!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                   Kill me!

               VENUS.
                      In the kiss.
                               [_Tannhäuser sleeps._




ACT III.


    For Love is lord of truth and loyalty,
    Lifting himself out of the lowly dust
    On golden plumes up to the purest sky,
    Above the reach of loathly sinful lust,
    Whose base affect through cowardly distrust
    Of his weak wings dare not to heaven fly,
    But like a moldwarp in the earth doth lie.

    His dunghill thoughts, which do themselves enure
    To dirty dross, no higher dare aspire,
    Nor can his feeble earthly eyes endure
    The flaming light of that celestial fire
    Which kindleth love in generous desire,
    And makes him mount above the native might
    Of heavy earth, up to the heaven’s height.
                        SPENSER, _Hymn in Honour of Love_.


_In Venusberg: changing afterward to a woodland cross-way._

               VENUS.
    Gone to his Goddess! the poor worm’s asleep.
    And yet—I cannot follow him. Not even
    Into the dreamland that these mortals use.
    There, I am barred. The flaming sword of Light
    Is set against me, and new pangs consume
    This nest of scorpions where my heart once was.
    Yet to my fearful task of hate I set
    No faltering bosom. I will have this man,
    His life, his strength; and live a little more.
    Life—shall I ever reach the splendid sword
    Of womanhood, and gird it, gain my will,
    A human soul, and from that altitude
    Renew the terrible war against the Gods?
    I have called Chronos the devouring God
    My father—shall his desolating reign
    Never return? Ay me! this heart of hate,
    Loathing the man, takes comfort in the beast,
    And gloats on the new garbage for an hour.
    So, Sin, embrace me! Watch; he moves again,
    Transfigured by the dream: slow rapture steals
    Over his face. Mere godhead could not bring
    That human light and living! I will win.
    He must have banished Her—and dreams of me.

            TANNHÄUSER (_in sleep_).
    Elizabeth!

               VENUS.
               His far-off baby-love!
    I triumph, then! The Goddess hath withdrawn.
    His mind works back to childhood, babydom,
    Will grow to manhood and remember me.

            TANNHÄUSER (_awaking, leaps to his feet_).
    Freedom! Elizabeth! All hail to Her!
    Radiant Goddess! Liberty and love!

               VENUS.
    What sayest thou? Curse Her!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                        My Elizabeth!

               VENUS.
    What? Art thou mad? Come close to me again.
    Forget this nightmare. Rather, tell me it,
    And I will soothe thee. Have I not a balm,
    A sovereign comfort in my old caress?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I must begone. She waits.

               VENUS.
                      Who waits? Come here!
    Let us talk fondly, set together still,
    Not with these shouts and wavings of the arms,
    Struts and unseemly gestures. Tannhäuser!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    She waits for me, my sweet Elizabeth!
    Venus or Lilith, I have loved thee well!
    Now, to my freedom!

               VENUS.
                   Your Elizabeth!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Ay, to those pure and alabaster brows,
    The tender fingers, and the maiden smile.
    Burn the whore’s bed! Unpaint the cruel lips!
    Cover the shameless belly, and forget
    The cunning attitudes and aptitudes!
    Unlearn the mowings, the lascivious grins!
    I perceive purity.

               VENUS.
                     Nay, I have loved thee!
    Fresh pleasure hourly filled the crystal cup.
    Shalt thou find wine so comely and so keen,
    So fresh with life to fill each aching vein
    With new electric fervour? Will she be
    My equal? She is mortal and a child.
    Her arms are frail and white. Her lily cheeks
    Could never take thy kiss. Thy love would shock,
    Repel. I scorn to say her love were less
    Than mine: I tell thee that she could not love
    Thee even at all as thou wouldst understand.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    So certain art thou? Let me go to her,
    Try, and come back!

               VENUS.
                   No doubt of that success!
    A child is easy to degrade!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                         Vile thing
    I will try otherwise—to raise myself:
    But if I fail, I will not drag her down;
    I will return.

               VENUS.
                  To lose thee for one hour
    Is my swift death—so desolate am I!
    I have not got one lover in the world,
    Save only Tannhäuser. And he will go.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    One lover! Who makes up the equal soul
    Of all the wickedness beneath the sun?
    Lilith! Seek out thy children to devour!
    Leave me. I go to my Elizabeth.

               VENUS.
    O no! It kills me! That is naked truth.
    I am the soul and symbol of desire,
    Yet individual to thy love. Stay! Stay!
    One last caress, and then I let thee go,
    And—die. I fear, and I detest, this death.
    I am not mortal, doomed to it! I slip
    Into mere slime; no resurrection waits
    Me, made the vilest of the stars that fell.
    I must not die. I dare not. But for thee,
    Thy love, one last extreme delirium!—
    Take thou this dagger! At the miracle
    Of a moment when our lips are fastened close
    Once more, in the unutterable kiss,
    Drive its sharp spirit to my heart!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                              Not I!
    I know the spell. I am warned. I will begone.

               VENUS.
    I swear I will not let thee! Thinkest thou
    So long I have held thee not to have the power
    To hold thee still by charm, or love, or force?
    Fool, for I hate thee! I will have thy life!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Where is the cavern in the mountain side,
    The accurséd gateway of this house of Hell?

               VENUS.
    Thou canst not find it! Fool!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                       And yet I will.

               VENUS.
    Meanwhile my chant shall tremble in the air,
    And rack thy limbs with poison, wither up
    The fine full blood, breed serpents in thy heart,
    And worms to eat thee. Living thou shalt be
    A sensible corpse, a walking sepulchre.
    Come, come, Apollyon! Come, my Aggereth!
    Belial, cheat his ears and blind his eyes!
    Come, all ye tribes of serpents and foul fish!
    Beetle and worm, I have a feast for you!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    The palace staggers. I can hardly see—
    Only these writhing horrors. I am blind!

               VENUS.
    Ha! My true knight! I ask thee once again,
    Once more invoke the epithets of love,
    Suspend my powers—constrain thee on my knees
    For thine old kisses. See, I am all thine!
    All thine the splendid body, and the shape
    Of mighty breasts, and supple limbs, and wide
    Lips, and slow almond eyes! Adorable,
    Seductive, sombre, moving amorously,
    Droop the long eyelids, purple with young blood,
    The lazy lashes and the flowing mane,
    The flame of fire from head to feet of me!
    The subtle fervours, drunken heats and ways,
    And perfumes maddening from the soul of spring!
    The little nipples, and the dangerous pit
    Set smiling in the alabaster; thine,
    The glowing arms are thine, the desperate
    Fresh kisses, and the gold that lurks upon
    The sunny skin, the marble of these brows,
    The roses, and the poppies, and the scent
    Subtle and sinful—thine, all thine, are these,
    What with my heart that only beats for thee,
    The many-throned and many-minded soul
    Centred to do thee worship. Hither, hither!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    This shakes my spirit as a winnower
    Whose fan is the eternal breath of God;
    Yet on my forehead I perceive a star
    That shames thy beauties and thy manifold
    Mind with its tiny triple flame. I go!

               VENUS.
    Try not the impossible. Thou knowest my power.
    I shall renew the charm.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                        I see a Power
    Above thy mockery of witchcraft. Work
    Thy devilish lusts on me unfortunate!
    There is no gateway to this fortalice?
    Thy fiends surround me? Hein! their pangs begin!
    I have one word, one cry, one exorcism:
    Avé Maria!

               VENUS.
              Mercy! Mercy, God!

    [_Thunder rolls in the lightning-riven sky. All the
        illusion vanishes, and Tannhäuser finds himself in
        a cross-way of the forest, where is a Crucifix. He
        is kneeling at the foot, amazed, as one awakening
        from a dream, or from a vision of mysterious power._

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I am escapéd as a little bird
    Out of the fowler’s net. I thank Thee, God!
    For in the pit of horror, and the clay
    Of death I cried, and Thou hast holpen me,
    Set me upon a rock, established me,
    And filled my mouth, and tuned mine ancient lyre
    With a new song—praise, praise to God above,
    And to Our Lady of the Smitten Heart,
    That David never knew: my pettiness
    Exceeding through Her mercy and Her might
    The King and Priest of Israel; for I know
    Her love, and She hath shewn to me Her face,
    And given me a magic star to stand
    Over the house that hides Elizabeth.

    [_A shepherd-boy is discovered upon a rock hard by._

            SHEPHERD-BOY.
    Ta-lirra-lirra! Hillo-ho! The morning!
                              [_He plays upon his flute._

            TANNHÄUSER.
    These were the melodies that I despised!
    Oh God! Be merciful to sinful me,
    And keep me in the Way of Truth. But Thou!
    Forgive, forgive! Lead, lead me to Thy Light!

                 SHEPHERD-BOY (_sings_).
                  Light in the sky
                    Dawns to the East!
                    Song-bird and beast
                  Wake and reply.
                  Let me not die,
                    Now, at the least!
                  Lord of the Light!
                    Queen of the dawn!
                  Soul of the Night
                    Hid and withdrawn!
                  Voice of the thunder!
                    Light of the levin!
                  I worship and wonder,
                    O maker of Heaven!
                  The night falls asunder;
                    The darkness is riven!

                  Light, O eternal!
                  Life, O diurnal!
                    Love, O withdrawn!
                  Heart of my May, spring
                    Far to Thy dawn!
                  God of the dayspring!
                    Sun on the lawn!
                  Hail to Thy splendour,
                    Holy, I cry!
                  Mary shall bend her
                    Face from the sky,
                  Subtle and tender—
                    Then I can die!

               TANNHÄUSER.
    The simple love of life and gladness there!
    Merely to be, and worship at the heart.
    How complex, the machinery of me!
    Better? I doubt it. Hark! he tunes again.

             SHEPHERD-BOY (_sings_).
        O Gretchen, when the morn is grey,
        Forsake thy flocks and steal away
        To that low bank where, shepherds say,
            The flowers eternal are.
        Thine eyes should gleam to see me there,
            As fixed upon a star.
        And yet thy lips should take a tune,
            And match me unaware—
        So steals the sun beside the moon
            And hides her lustre rare.
        The bloom upon the peach is fine;
        The blossom on thy cheek is mine!
            O kiss me—if you dare!
        I called thee by the name of love
        That mothers fear and gods approve,
            And maidens blush to say—
        O Gretchen, meet me in the dell
        We know and love, who love so well,
            While morn is cold and gray!
        So, match thy blushes to the dawn;
            Thy bosom to the rising moon,
        Until our loves to earth have drawn
        Some new bewitching tune.
        Come, Gretchen, in the dusk of day,
        Where nymphs and dryads creep away
        Beneath the oaks, to laugh and play
            And sink in lover’s swoon.
        We’ll sing them sister songs, and shew
        What secrets mortal lovers know.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    The simple life of love and joy therein!
    Merely to love—to take such pride in it
    Gods must behold! The childish easiness,
    Impossible to me, who am become
    Perhaps the subtlest mind of men. Alas!
    Maybe in this I still am self-deceived,
    Merely the fool swelled up with bitter words,
    Imagination, and the toadstool growth,
    Thought, wounded; as a scorpion to sting
    Its own bruised life out. This is Tannhäuser!
    How long ago since he took pleasure in
    Such love—                         [_A horn winds._
               such music as yon horn below—
                                       [_A chant is heard._
    Such worship as the simple chant that steals
    Calm and majestic in the solitude
    Up from the valley. Pilgrims, by my fay!
                                       [_Enter_ PILGRIMS.

                PILGRIMS.
            Hail to Thee, Lady bright,
            Queen of the stars of night!
                Avé Maria!
            Spouse of the Breath divine,
            Hail to Thee, shrouded shrine,
            Whence our Redeemer came!
            Hail to Thy holy name!
                Avé Maria!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Those words that saved me!

            SHEPHERD-BOY.
                       Pray, your blessing, sirs!
    I worship Mary in my simple way,
    And see Her name in all the starry host,
    And Jesus crucified on every tree
    For me! God speed you to the House of God!

          THE ELDEST PILGRIM.
    The Blessing of the Virgin on your head!

          THE YOUNGEST PILGRIM.
    What make you, sir, so downcast? Come with us
    Who taste all happiness in uneasiness,
    Hunger and thirst, in His sweet Name—

             TANNHÄUSER.
                                 Ah no!
    I have been shown another way than yours!
    I am too old in this world’s weariness,
    Too hungry in its hunger unto God,
    Too foolish-wise, too passionate-cynical,
    To seek your royal road to Deity!

          ANOTHER PILGRIM.
    Leave him! Belike ’tis some philosopher
    With words too big to understand himself.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    With heart too seared to understand himself!
    With mind too wise to understand himself!
    With soul too small to understand himself!

          ELDEST PILGRIM.
    Cling to the Cross, sir, there is hope in that!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    You know not, friend, the man to whom you speak.
    I have lived long in miracles enough,
    Myself the crowning miracle of all,
    That I am merely here. God speed you, sirs!
    I ask your blessing, not to stay therewith
    My soul’s own need (though that is dire enough)
    But—he that blesseth shall himself be blessed!
    My blessing were small help to you, my friends.

        AN INTELLIGENT PILGRIM.
    For your own reason, give it to us, then!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    The Blessing of the Lord! May Mary’s self
    Be with you and defend you evermore,
    Most from the fearful destiny of him
    Men used to call the minstrel Tannhäuser!

          ELDEST PILGRIM.
    A sombre blessing! May God’s mercy fall
    On you and yours!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                On mine, ah mine! Amen
    Amen to that!

          ELDEST PILGRIM (_smiles_).
                  On her you love, my friend!
    We will pass onward, by your honour’s leave!

               PILGRIMS.
            Hail, hail, O Queen, to Thee,
            Spouse of Eternity!
                Avé Maria!
            Mother in Maidenhood!
            Saintly Beatitude!
            Queen of the Angel Host!
            Bride of the Holy Ghost!
                Avé Maria!      [_Exeunt Pilgrims._

            TANNHÄUSER.
    The love of Isis! No mere love to Her
    That is inborn in every soul of us!
    It is Her love to Christ that we must taste,
    Uniting us with Her eternal sigh.
    There is a problem infinite again.
    I have not gained one jot since first I saw
    The stately bosom of the Venusberg,
    Save that mine eyes have seen a little truth,
    My body found a little weariness.
    I am very feeble! Hither comes the hunt!
                           [_A horn winds quite close by._
    The noble, doomed, swift beauty! Closer yet
    Pant the long hounds! What heart he has! One, two!
    See the brach dying by his bloody flank!
    So could not Tannhäuser awhile ago.
    My help lay outside and above myself.
    What skills him he is brave? He ends the same.
    Poor stag! Here sweep the foremost hunters up.
    My very kinsmen! There rides Wolfram too!
    The proper minstrel! The ideal lover!
    The pure, unsullied soul. Even so, forsooth!
    They tell no secrets in the scullery.
    And there is Heinrich, wastrel of the Court,
    Yet hides a heart beneath the foolish face.
    And lo! The Landgrave! Flushed, undignified!
    The chase was long—if he could see himself!
    Wind, wind the mort! What call will answer me
    When I step forward? Am I dead, I wonder,
    Or merely on my hare-brain quest? Three years
    Since I was seen in Germany!
                   [_He descends the hill and enters the company._
                              Hail, friends!
    Good cousin Landgrave, merry be the meet!

            LANDGRAVE.
    Hands off me, fellow! Who are you?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                                 My lord,
    Your cousin. Is my face so changed with care,
    My body shrunken with my suffering
    (That was not ever of the body) so?

              WOLFRAM.
    I know you, my old friend! Our chiefest bird!
    Sweetest of singers!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                 No, the naughty one!

              HEINRICH.
    Tannhäuser! Yes! And we have thought you dead.

              LANDGRAVE.
    Friends, will you swear to him?

              HEINRICH.
                        Yes, yes, ’tis he!

              WOLFRAM.
    I know the blithe look in the sober eyes!

              LANDGRAVE.
    Changed verily. It was most urgent, cousin,
    I were assured of your identity.
    Three weeks the couriers scour the land for you,
    Urgent demands:—how came you here at last?
    Your horse? Your arms? Three years since Germany
    Saw the brave eyes and kindly face of you!
    Where have you been? Upon the sacred quest
    Still riding?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                  Ay, my lord, upon the quest.

              LANDGRAVE.
    You travelled in far lands?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                    Far, very far!

              LANDGRAVE.
    You fought with Turks?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                     I fought within myself.

              LANDGRAVE.
    Why is such suffering written in dark lines,
    And painted in the greyness of your hair?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I had an evil dream.

              LANDGRAVE.
                     You saw the Grail?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I saw—strange things.

              WOLFRAM.
                    For very feebleness
    Your limbs shake under you. How hither, friend?
    Your horse and arms? Your squire?

            TANNHÄUSER (_with sudden passion_).
                  My squire is dead.
    I am no weakling that I need a knave
    Hanging upon me—’tis an incubus.

              LANDGRAVE.
    And then your horse?

              TANNHÄUSER.
                        I know not; possibly
    Kept as an hostage. I was prisoner once.

              WOLFRAM.
    Prisoner? By here?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                      A-many castles, sir,
    Held by old ogres—and not all of them
    Stand in the mid-day, front the sober sun,
    Answer the slug-horn.

              LANDGRAVE.
                      You are pleased to riddle.
    Ever the poet!

            TANNHÄUSER (_aside_).
                     Let me try the truth
    For certitude of incredulity!
    (_Aloud, laughing_) I was in Venusberg!

                           ALL (_except_ HEINRICH, _who laughs_).
                                                Save us, Maria!

    [_They look about them fearfully and cross themselves._

              LANDGRAVE.
    Even in jest, such words!—Most dangerous
    Even to think of!—but to speak!

              HEINRICH (_aside_).
                          These fools!

    [_He remains, thoughtfully regarding Tannhäuser._

              LANDGRAVE.
    God avert omens! Soft you, Tannhäuser,
    You heard the heralds?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                  Never a word of them!

              LANDGRAVE.
    You must remember my Elizabeth,
    My daughter—I designed to marry her
    To a most noble youth—

            TANNHÄUSER.
                      Von Aschenheim?

              LANDGRAVE.
    The same. I would have wed her, but (’tis strange!)
    The lady had a purpose of her own,
    And swore by all the Virgins in the Book
    She would wed nobody but—Tannhäuser.
    So, like the foolish, doting sire I am,
    I gave her thirty days to find you. This
    Must dumb you with astonishment.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                                 Well, no!
    The details, unfamiliar! But the theme
    I knew. And therefore leaps my bosom up:
    I rob your verderer of his nag, and ho!
    Low the long gallop to Elizabeth!

              WOLFRAM.
    Lucky and brave. How we all envy you!

              HEINRICH.
    Envy? This day when he comes back to us!
    Why, we are lucky too! We thought you dead!

             WOLFRAM.
    Begrudge you, no! But—wish our luck were yours?
    Yes! Come, Tannhäuser, there’s my hand on it!
    Luck, love, and loyalty—the triple toast!

            FORESTERS.
    Tannhäuser! Luck, and love, and loyalty!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I thank you, loving kinsmen and my friends.
    But see, I am impatient to be gone!
    Your horse—that favour I shall not forget,
    Nor linger to repay. Good morrow then!
    Good sport all day!

              LANDGRAVE.
                  God speed thee, Tannhäuser.
                                  [_Exit Tannhäuser._
    Am I still dreaming? It was surely he
    But such an one, compact of suffering,
    Of joy, of love, of pity, of despair;
    Half senseless, half too subtle for my sense.

              WOLFRAM.
    He has passed through some unimagined test,
    Or undergone some sorrow. Leave it so!
    I saw high grief upon him, and new love!

              HEINRICH.
    You are the poet! To your instinct then!
    Here’s to the insight given us by God!

            LANDGRAVE.
    Wolfram is right; a truce to jest to-day.
    The dogs are loose. Ride forward, gentlemen!

    [_Amid the winding of horns and cries of the
        huntsmen the company moves off._

              HEINRICH.
    They hate his very name! Dear Tannhäuser!
                                            [_Exit._




ACT IV.


    “So, force is sorrow, and each sorrow, force:
      What then? since Swiftness gives the charioteer
    The palm, his hope be in the vivid horse
      Whose neck God clothed with thunder, not the steer
    Sluggish and safe! Yoke Hatred, Crime, Remorse,
      Despair: but ever mind the whirling fear,
    Let, through the tumult, break the poet’s face
      Radiant, assured his wild slaves win the race!”
                                 _Two Poets of Croisic._


                 SCENE I.

    _A room in the palace of the Landgrave._

            ELIZABETH.
    I am ashamed to look upon thy face!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    O Love! Pure mystery of life!

            ELIZABETH.
                               Not so.
    Learn how this came. My father would have made
    A match of lands and titles. I declined,
    Minded to keep my high virginity.
    He laughed, was cruel. So I said at last:
    “Tannhäuser only!” Was this modesty?
    Listen. You loved me when I was a child;
    And, in my childish way, I looked to you,
    Loved sitting at your knee and toying with
    The great cross-hilt, or watching how the steel
    Outshone the jewelled scabbard when you drew
    (You would not let me touch) the delicate blade
    Half out: and also fingering your harp,
    Picking child’s tunes out, while you curled my hair
    Between two fingers, dreamily enough!
    Then, too, you went away out of my life!
    You see the symbol you have been to me?
    The swift high mind, the heart of gold and fire,
    The living purpose and the mystic life
    Of lonely seeking for the Grail of God!
    I—call you husband? When I said your name,
    It was to set the task impossible:—
    Had they but known it—just as one should say:
    “Bring down St Michael: let me marry him!”
    They knew the angels were too pure; but you,
    They guessed not how exalted were your hopes;
    How utterly unselfish, pure, and true,
    Your great heart beat!

            TANNHÄUSER (_with bitterness_).
                          I hardly knew, myself!
    (_Aside._) Here is the virgin insight of the truth!
    Or—cannot purity be brought to know
    Aught but itself? Some poets tell us that!
    (_Aloud._) I am unworthy even to speak to you.

            ELIZABETH.
    The proof! The proof! Dear God, how true it is
    That such high worthiness sees nothing there
    In his own heart (save what is very Christ)
    But wickedness!

            TANNHÄUSER (_aside_).
                    This is my punishment!
    This faith, this hope, this love—to me—to me!

            ELIZABETH.
    Yet, once my word went forth into the world.
    Suddenly came the fear that you were still
    Accessible to men—might hear, might come!
    The kind, grave face of you—that light outshone
    The mystical ideal. Therefore too
    I minded me of our old baby-love,
    And—marriages are made in heaven, you know!
    Besides—Our Lady shewed me in a dream
    How you would come.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                        And now? So sure are you
    The loving word you spoke an hour ago
    Came from the heart—who called me by mistake?

            ELIZABETH.
    So sure? You want me to confess again
    The deep pure love, the love indicible.

            TANNHÄUSER (_to himself_).
    Words, thoughts, that fail her? How should acts exceed?
    (_Aloud._) Better sit thus and read each other’s thoughts—
    I in the blue eyes, in the hazel you!
    Then, bending, I may touch my lips upon
    Sweet thoughtful brows.

            ELIZABETH.
                        Your kisses move my soul.
    Strange thoughts and unimagined destinies
    Take ship, and harbour in the heart of me.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Words mean too much, and never mean enough.
    Look, only look!

            ELIZABETH.
                I am so happy—so!


               SCENE II.

    _The Court assembled in the Great Hall. Landgrave enthroned,
        Elizabeth by his side. Facing them are the competing minstrels.
        Around, courtiers and fair ladies._

              LANDGRAVE.
    Welcome all minstrels! Let us celebrate
    In the old fashion, dear to Germany,
    My child’s betrothal to this noble youth,
    Great lord, true knight, and honest gentleman,
    So long who journeyed on the holy quest
    Forgotten of these younger days, and now
    Come back among us to receive reward
    For those long sufferings; in days of peace,
    In fruitful love, and marriage happiness.
    So, to the poet’s tourney.

              WOLFRAM.
                      Sire, Lord Heinrich
    Craves your high pardon.

              LANDGRAVE.
                      Ha! He is not here!

              WOLFRAM.
    Our sturdy lover will not be consoled
    For losing, as he phrases it, his friend.

              LANDGRAVE.
    Well, we forgive him the more readily
    Because of the occasion. One alone
    Of all themes possible may grace this hour;—
    Love! Let the lots of precedence be drawn.
    Tannhäuser, you will string us once again
    Your harp forgotten?

            TANNHÄUSER.
                 That will I, my lord.

              HERALD.
    On the Lord Wolfram falls it first to sing.

              WOLFRAM (_sings_).
    Tender the smile, and faint the lover’s sigh,
    When first love dawns in the blue maiden sky,
    Where happy peace is linked with purity.

    As sad spring’s sun starts on his daily race,
    Reddens the east, as if in sad disgrace;
    So love first blushes on a true maiden’s face.

    Soft, soft, the gaze of married folk, I think,
    Limpid and calm as pools where cattle drink;
    And, when they kiss, most discontentments shrink!

    Even as the stars together sing (we hear)
    So sings the married life, a tuneful sphere.
    Husband is he, and she is very dear.

    How truly beautiful it is to see
    Old age in perfect unanimity,
    Affections smooth, and buzzing like a bee.

    The sun sets, in conjunction with the moon.
    Death comes at last, a pleasure and a boon,
    And they arrive in heaven very soon.

    [_Immense, spontaneous, uncontrollable applause
        sweeps like a whirlwind through the court._

    AN UNKNOWN MINSTREL (_breaking in unheralded_).
    Tender the phrase, and faint the melody,
    When poets praise a maiden’s purity;
    Platitude linked to imbecility.
                                [_Murmurs of surprise._

    As ’mongst spring’s sprigs sprouts sunshine’s constant face;
    Or as a mill grinds on, with steady pace;
    So sprouts, so grinds, the unblushing commonplace.

    Soft, soft the brain—
                  [_The murmurs break into an indignant uproar._

              HERALD.
         Silence!

              LANDGRAVE.
            Sir Minstrel, you are insolent!
    We do not know you, yet have borne with you,
    Rudely uprising ere your turn was come:—
    And you abuse our patience to insult
    The noble minstrel whose impassioned song
    Touched every heart. Sing in your turn you may.
    Love is the theme, not imbecility!

              WOLFRAM.
    That is the subject next his heart, no doubt!
                                               [_Laughter._

              HERALD.
        Lord Bertram!

              BERTRAM.
              I shall sing in other key.
                                      [_Sings._

    He is the equal of the gods, my queen,
      He crowned and chosen out of men,
        Who sits beside thee, sees
        Love’s laughing ecstasies
      Flame in thy face, and alter then
    To the low light of passion dimly seen
    In shaded woods and dells, Love’s wide demesne.

    But me! I burn with love! My lips are wan!
      Thy face is turned—I flame! I melt! I fall!
        My heart is chilled and dark;
        My soul’s ethereal spark
      Is dulled for sorrow; my despairs recall
    At last Thy name, O gracious Paphian,
    Lady of Mercy to the love of man!

    Come, come, immortal, of the many thrones!
      Sparrows and doves in chariot diamonded
        Drawn through the midmost air!
        O Lady of despair,
      Who bound the golden helmet of Thy head?
    Whose voice rings out the pitiful low tones:
    “Who, who hath wronged thee? And my power atones.”

    “She who now doth flee, shall soon pursue thee;
     She who spurns thy gifts, with gifts shall woo thee;
     She who loves not, she shall cleave unto thee,
               Thou the unwilling!”

    Peer of Gods is he, equal soul to theirs,
      Who lingers in thy passionate embrace:
        Whose languor-laden kiss
        Cleaves where thy bosom is
      A throne of beauty for thy throat and face!
    In these dark joys and exquisite despairs,
    O Love, let Death lay finger unawares!

              LANDGRAVE.
    Passion and music—but no Principle!
    How different is Tannhäuser!
    (_To the unknown minstrel_) You, sir, next!
    Sing of pure love and noble womanhood.
    Our court loves not these wastrel troubadours,
    Loose locks, Hushed faces, soul’s unseemliness.

          THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL (_sings_).
    Amid earth’s motley, Gaia’s cap and bells,
        This too material, too unreal life,
    Sing, sing the crown of tender miracles,
        The pure true wife!

    Sing not of love, the unutterable one,
        The love divine that Mary has to men.
    Seek not the winepress and the rising sun
        Beyond thy ken!

            TANNHÄUSER (_aside_).
    Who is this man that reads my inmost thought?

          THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    I sing of love, most delicate and pure,
        Surely the crown of life! How slow and sweet
    Its music! Shall the ecstasy endure,
        Sunshine on wheat?

    Where leads this gentle love? I see you sigh!
        The Scythe is laid unto the Golden Grain:
    A note of utter unreality
        Usurps the strain.

    I sing not of that other flame of hell
        Wrapping with torture the delighted brow—
    But thou! who knowest, and hast known, so well,
        Sing thou!
                 [_Tannhäuser, entranced, imagines himself
                          to be still in Venusberg._

            TANNHÄUSER (_aside_).
    I have been dreaming that I left this place,
    Escaped with life, wooed my Elizabeth;
    My dreams are always strange in Venusberg.
                                     [_Taking his harp._
    Sing thee again, dear lady, of our joy?
    Listen, then, listen! For some sombre finger,
    Other than mine, impulses on the string.
    This tune I knew not! See, the strings are moved
    Subtly as if by witchcraft—or by God!
                                         [_Sings._

    In the Beginning God began,
    And saw the Night of Time begin!
    Chaos, a speck; and space, a span;
    Ruinous cycles fallen in,
    And Darkness on the Deep of Time.
    Murmurous voices call and climb;
    Faces, half-formed, arise; and He
    Looked from the shadow of His throne,
    The curtain of Eternity;
    He looked—and saw Himself alone,
    And on the sombre sea, the primal one,
    Faint faces, that might not abide;
    Flicker, and are foredone.
    So were they caught within the spacious tide,
    The sleepy waters that encased the world.
    Monsters rose up, and turned themselves, and curled
    Into the deep again.

    The darkness brooded, and the bitter pain
    Of chaos twisted the vast limbs of time
    In horrid rackings: then the spasm came:
    The Serpent rose, the servant of the slime,
    In one dark miracle of flame
    Unluminous and void: the silent claim
    Of that which was, to be: the cry to climb,
    The bitter birth of Nature: uttermost Night
    Dwelt, inaccessible to sound and sight;
    Shielded from Voice, impervious to Light.

    Lo! on the barren bosom, on the brine,
    The spirit of the Mighty One arose,
    A flickering light, a formless triple flame,
    The self-begotten, the impassive shrine,
    The seat of Heaven’s archipelagoes;
    Yet lighted not the glory whence it came,
    Nor shone upon the surface of the sea.
    Time, and the Great One, and the Nameless Name,
    Held in their grip the child, Eternity.
    Silence and Darkness in their womb withheld
    That spiritual fire, and brooded still:
    Nature and Time, their soleness undispelled,
    Ever awaiting the eternal Will.
    And Law was unbegotten: uttermost Night
    Dwelt, inaccessible to sound and sight;
    Shielded from Voice, impervious to Light.

    Then grew within the barren womb of this
    The Breath of the Eternal and the Vast,
    Softer than dawn, and closer than a kiss—
    And lo! the chaos and the darkness passed!
    At the creative sigh the Light became.
    Chaos rolled back in the abundant flame.
    The vast and mystic Soul,
    The Firmament, a living coal,
    Flamed ’twixt the glory and the sea below.
    The whirling force began. The atom whirled
    In vortices of flashing matter: wild as snow
    On mountain tops by the wind-spirits hurled,
    Blinding and blind, the sparks of spirit curled
    Each to its proper soul; the wide wheels flow,
    Orderly streams, and lose the rushing speed,
    Meet, mingle, marry. Fire and air express
    Their dews and winds of molten loveliness,
    Fine flakes of arrowy light, the dawn’s first deed.
    Metallic showers and smoke self-glittering
    For many an aeon. Wild the pennons spring
    Of streaming flame! Then, surging from the tide,
    Grew the desirable, the golden one,
    Separate from the sun.
    Now fire and air no more exult, exceed,
    Are balanced in the sphere. The waters wide
    Glow on the bosom of fixed earth; and Need,
    The Lady of Beginning, also was.
    Thus was the firmament a vital glass,
    The waters as the vessel of the soul;
    Thus earth, the mystic basis of the whole,
    Was smitten through with fire, as chrysopras,
    Blending, uniting, and dividing it,
    Volcanic, airy, and celestial.

    I rose within the elemental ball,
    And lo! the Ancient One of Days did sit!
    His head and hair were white as wool, His eyes
    A flaming fire: and from the splendid mouth
    Flashed the Eternal Sword!
    Lo! Lying at his feet as dead, I saw
    The leaping-forth of Law:
    Division of the North wind and the South,
    The lightning of the armies of the Lord;
    East rolled asunder from the rended West;
    Height clove the depth: the Voice begotten said:
    “Divided be thy ways and limited!”
    Answered the reflux and the indrawn breath:
    “Let there be Life, and Death!”

    “The Earth, she shall be governed by her parts:
    Division be upon her! Let her glory
    From crown to valley, source and spring to mouth,
    North unto South,
    Smooth gulf and sea to rugged promontory,
    Always be vexed and drunken, that the hearts
    Ruling her course round alway in the sky;
    And as an handmaid let her serve and die!
    One season, let it still confound another;
    No man behold his brother;
    No creature in it or upon, the same!
    Her members, let them differ; be no soul
    Equal! Let thought, let reasonable things,
    Bow to thy wings,
    Thy manifest control,
    Vexation! weeding out of one another.
    Their dwelling-places, let them lose their name!
    The work of man, and all his pomp and power,
    Deface them: shatter the aspiring tower!
    Let all his houses be as caves and holes,
    Unto the Beast I give them. And their souls—
    Lift up the shadowy hand!—
    Confound with darkness them that understand!
    For why?
    Me, the Most High,
    It doth repent Me, having made mankind!
    Let her be known a little while, and then
    A little while a stranger. Dumb and blind,
    Deaf to the Light and Breath of Me be men!
    She is become an harlot’s bed, the home
    And dwelling of the fallen one! Arise!
    Ye heavens, ye lower serving skies!
    Beneath My dome
    Serve ye the lofty ones. The Governors,
    Them shall ye govern. Cast the fallen down!
    Bring forth with them that are Fertility’s!
    Destroy the rotten! Let no shores
    Remain in any number! Add and crown,
    Diminish and discrown, until the stars
    Be numbered! Rise, ye adamantine bars!
    Let pass your Masters! Move ye and appear!
    Execute judgment and eternal ill,
    The law of justice, and the law of fear.
    It is My Will!”
    So shed the primal curse
    Its dreadful stature, its appalling shape.
    In giant horror the clouds rolling drape
    Earth, like a plumed pall upon an hearse,
    Till God looms up, half devil and half ape,
    Heaven exulting in the hateful rape;
    And still the strong curse rolls
    Over accurséd and immortal souls,
    Covering the corners of the universe
    Without escape.

    This is the evil destiny of man:
    The desperate plan
    Made by the Ancient One, to keep His power.
    Limits He set, made space unsearchable
    Yet bounded, made time endless to transcend
    Man’s thought to comprehend:
    Builded the Tower
    Of life, and girded it with walls of hell,
    The name of Death. This limit in all things
    Baffles the spirit wings,
    Chains the swift soul; for even Death is bound.
    In its apparent amplitude I saw,
    I, who have slept through death, have surely found
    The old accurséd law,
    And death has changed to life. This task alone
    Shoots to the starry throne:
    That if man lack not purpose, but succeed,
    Reaching in very deed
    Impersonal existence;—Lo!
    Man is made one with God, an equal soul.
    For he shall know
    The harmony, the oneness of the Whole.

    This was my purpose. Vain,
    Ah vain! The Star of the Unconquered Will
    Centred its vehemence and light, to stain
    In one successful strain,
    The stainless sphere of the unchangeable,
    With its own passionate, desperate breath
    Ever confronting the dark gate of Death.
    I passed that gate! O pitiful! The same
    Mystery holds me, and the flame
    Of Life stands up, unbroken citadel,
    Beyond my sight, vague, far, intangible.
    Broken are will, and witchery, and prayer.
    Remains the life of earth, which is but hell,
    Destiny’s web, and my immense despair.

              LANDGRAVE.
    Your words are terrible! We knew them true
    Even while you sang. But see! the light of day!
    Beauty in all things and—for you—true love!
    All the blind horror of the song recedes.
    There is a sequel; is there not, my friend?
    Of love, your theme, we have not heard a note.

             TANNHÄUSER.
    That is a question. I am not so sure
    My song was not entirely to that end.

               WOLFRAM.
    Yes, poet, true one that you are indeed!
    You shew us the dilemma of the soul,
    The Gordian knot Love only hews asunder.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Or—shall I say?—soothes only, bandages,
    Not heals the sore of Destiny?

              WOLFRAM.
                         No, certes,
    But substitutes for one reality
    Another—and a lovely pleasant one.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Existence is illusion after all;
    Man, a bad joke; and God, mere epigram!
    If we must come to that. And likewise love.

              LANDGRAVE.
    You have dipped somewhat in philosophy
    Of a too cynical and wordy sort.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    To logic there is one reality,
    Words. But the commonsense of humankind
    By logic baffles logic, chains with Deed
    The lion Thought. It is a circle, friends!
    All life and death and mystery ravel out
    Into one argument—the rounded one.

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    Count me your children their arithmetic!
    Zero, the circle, grows to one, the line:
    Both limitless in their own way. Proceed.
    Two is by shape the Coptic aspirate,
    Life breathed, and death indrawn. And so
    Rounds you at last the ten, completion’s self,
    The circle and the line. Why stick at nought?

              BERTRAM.
    Only a donkey fastened to a post
    Moves in a circle.

              LANDGRAVE.
                  This is noble talk!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    Leave the wide circle—word and argument!
    Move to the line—the steady will of man,
    That shall attract the Two, the Breath of Life,
    The Holy Spirit: land you in the Three,
    Where form is perfect—in the triangle.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    My friend, the Three is infinitely small,
    Mere surface. And I seek the Depth divine!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    The solid! But the triangle aspires
    To that same unity that you despise,
    And lo! the Pyramid! The Sages say:
    Unite that to the Sphinx, and all is done,
    Completion of the Magnum Opus.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                                No!
    Each new dimension lands me farther yet
    In the morass of limit.

    THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
                          Be it so!
    But follow me through all the labyrinth,
    And ten rewards us. And your Zero’s found
    To have an actual value and effect
    On unity—your Will.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                   What’s then to seek?

          THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    The fourth dimension, for the early step.

              LANDGRAVE.
    It seems this talk is merely mystical.
    This is no College of the Holy Ghost
    For Rosencreutz his mystifying crew!

              A COURTIER.
    A Poet’s tourney, and the theme is Love!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    There is a sequel to our poet’s song,
    And he will sing it.

            TANNHÄUSER.
                  No! I know it not!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    The winepress and the sun!

    TANNHÄUSER (_again in Venusberg_).
                           My spouse and Queen,
    Bright Goddess of the amber limbs, the lips
    Redder than poppies in the golden corn
    That is your mane! Listen, the after-song!
                                 [_Taking his harp._

              LANDGRAVE.
    What are these words?

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
                     Let silence now abide:
    Disturb not the impassioned utterance!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                                     [_Sings._
    Can you believe the deadly will’s decree,
    The bitter earnestness of this desire,
    The deep intention, the solemnity,
    Profound as night and penetrant as fire,
    The awful grasping at the Infinite,
    Even as I grapple at the breasts of thee,
    The seeking and the striving to the light
    Deep in thine eyes, where Hell flames steadily?
    I am not clinging thus
    Despairing to the body of thy sin
    For mere delight—Ah, deadly is to us
    The pleasure wrapping us, and holding in
    All love, all hate—the miserable way!
    Dawns no devouring day
    Still on the infinite slow tune of limbs
    Moving in rapture; sleepy echo swims
    In the dissolving brain.
    Love conquering lassitude at last to win
    Pain out of peace, and pleasure from a pang;
    Then, scorpion-stung of its own terrible tang,
    Burnt of its own fire, soiled of its own stain,
    Falls conquered as a bird
    Bolt-stricken through the brain,
    To the resounding plain:
    The double word,
    The see-saw of all misery—begin
    The alluring mysteries of lust and sin;
    Ends their delight!—and are they clear to sight?
    Or mixed with death, compact of night?
    Begin—the bitter tears of impotence,
    The sad permuted sense
    Of this despair—what would you? and renew
    The long soft warfare—the enchanted arms,
    The silken body’s charms,
    The lips that murmur and the breasts that sting
    The eyes that sink so deep
    Beyond the steeps and avenues of sleep,
    And of their wonder bring
    No ultimation from the halls of night,
    The slippery staircase, and the Fatal Throne,
    The Evil Mouse, the Fugitive of Light,
    The great Unluminous, the Formless One!
    Stoop not! Beneath, a precipice is set,
    The Seven Steps. Stoop not, forget
    Never the splendid Image, and the realm
    Where lightnings overwhelm
    The evil, and the barren, and the vile,
    In God’s undying smile!
    Stoop not, O stoop not, to yon splendid world,
    Yon darkly-splendid, airless, void, inane,
    Blind confines in stupendous horror curled,
    The sleepless place of Terror and distress,
    Luring damned souls with lying loveliness,
    The Habitation and the House of Pain.
    For that is their abode, the Wretched Ones,
    Of all unhappiness the sons!

    And when, invoking often, thou shalt see
    That formless Fire; when all the earth is shaken,
    The stars abide not, and the moon is gone,
    All Time crushed back into Eternity,
    The Universe by earthquake overtaken;
    Light is not, and the thunders roll,
    The World is done:
    When in the darkness Chaos rolls again
    In the excited brain:
    Then, O then call not to thy view that visible
    Image of Nature; fatal is her name!
    It fitteth not thy body to behold
    That living light of Hell,
    The unluminous, dead flame,
    Until that body from the crucible
    Hath passed, pure gold!
    For, from the confines of material space,
    The twilight-moving place,
    The gates of matter, and the dark threshold,
    Before the faces of the Things that dwell
    In the Abodes of Night,
    Spring into sight
    Demons dog-faced, that show no mortal sign
    Of Truth, but desecrate the Light Divine,
    Seducing from the sacred mysteries.

    But, after all these Folk of Fear are driven
    Before the avenging levin
    That rives the opening skies,
    Behold that Formless and that Holy Flame
    That hath no name;
    That Fire that darts and flashes, writhes and creeps
    Snake-wise in royal robe,
    Wound round that vanished glory of the globe,
    Unto that sky beyond the starry deeps,
    Beyond the Toils of Time—then formulate
    In thine own mind, luminous, concentrate,
    The Lion of the Light, a child that stands
    On the vast shoulders of the Steed of God:
    Or winged, or shooting flying shafts, or shod
    With the flame-sandals. Then, lift up thine hands!
    Centre thee in thine heart one scarlet thought
    Limpid with brilliance of the Light above!
    Draw into nought
    All life, death, hatred, love:
    All self concentred in the sole desire—
    Hear thou the Voice of Fire!

    This hope was Zoroaster’s—this is mine!
    Not one but many splendours hath the Shrine:
    Not one but many paths approach the gate
    That guards the Adytum, fortifying Fate!
    Mine was, by weariness of blood and brain,
    Mere bitter fruit of pain
    Sought in the darkness of an harlot’s bed,
    To make me as one dead:
    To loose the girders of the soul, and gain
    Breathing and life for the Intelligible;
    Find death, yet find it living. Deep as Hell
    I plunged the soul; by all blind Heaven unbound
    The spirit, freed, pierced through the maze profound,
    And knew Itself, an eagle for a dove.
    So in one man the height and deep of love
    Joined, in two states alternate (even so
    Are life and death)—shall one unite the two,
    My long impulsive strife?
    Did I find life?
    The real life—to know
    The ways of God. Alas! I never knew.
    Then came our Lady of the Sevenfold Light,
    Shewed me a distant plan, distinct and clear,
    As twilight to the dayspring and the night,
    Dividing and uniting even here:
    The middle path—life interfused with death—
    Pure love; the secret of Elizabeth!
    This is my secret—in the man’s delight
    To lose that stubborn ecstasy for God!
    To this clear knowledge hath my path been trod
    In deepest hell—in the profoundest sky!
    This knowledge—the true immortality,
    I came unto through pain and tears,
    Tigerish hopes, and serpent loves, and dragon fears,
    Most bitter kisses, salted springs and dry;
    In those deep caverns and slow-moving years,
    When dwelt I, in the Mount of Venus, even I!
                       [_The spell is broken, and uproar ensues._

              LANDGRAVE.
    The fiend! The atheist! Devil that you are!

               VOICES.
    Kill him, ay, kill him!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                  Crucify him, say!
            [_Tannhäuser extends his arms as on a cross._

              LANDGRAVE.
    Blaspheme not! Dare not to insult the sign
    Of our Redemption! Gentlemen and peers,
    What say you? shall he live to boast himself,
    The abandoned, perjured, the apostate soul,
    Daring to come to our pure court to brag
    Of his incredible vileness? To link up
    The saintly purity of this my child
    With his seducer’s heart of hell! My voice!
    Death! Your cry echoes me?

               VOICES.
                       Death! Death!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                                     Leap out,
    Sword of my fathers! you have heard my harp!
    Its music stings your vile hypocrisy
    Into mere hatred. Truth is terrible!
    You, cousin, taken in adultery!
    You, Wolfram, lover of the kitchen maids!
    You, Jerome—yes, I know your secret deeds!
    You, ladies! Are your faces painted thus
    Not to hide wrinkles of debauchery?
    To catch new lovers?

              LANDGRAVE.
                    Stop the lying mouth!
    Friends, your sword-service!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                      Will they answer you?
    My arm is weary as your souls are not
    Of beastliness: I have drawn my father’s sword,
    Hard as your virtue is the easy sort,
    Heavy to handle as your loves are light,
    Smooth as your lies, and sharper than your hates!
    I know you! Cowards to the very bone!
                                      [_Driving them out._
    Who fights me, of this sworded company?
    Cannot my words have sting in them enough,
    Now, to make one of you turn suddenly
    And stab me from behind? Out, out with you!
    Fling-to the doors! A murrain on the curs!
    So, I am master!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
                    Well and merrily done!
    But look you to the lady; she has swooned.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Who are you, sir, stood smiling, nonchalant,
    At all the turmoil, ridiculing it?
    You knew the secret symbol of my life,
    You forced me to that miserable song.

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    My name, sir, at your service, is GESCHICHT.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Sent? And the purpose of your coming here?
    You must wield power to keep them silent so,
    When the first word had culminated else
    In twice the tempest echoed to the last!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    It was most necessary for yourself
    To formulate your thought in word. Enough—
    The thought transmuted in the very act.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    You know? You know! The new illusion gone!
    Bitter, O bitter will it be to say!

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    Due grace and courage will be found for you.
    Farewell, Tannhäuser!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                  Shall we meet again?

           THE UNKNOWN MINSTREL.
    There is one glamour you must wreathe in gloom
    Before you come to the dark hill of dreams.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    My soul is sick of riddling. Fare you well!
                               [_Exit the Unknown Minstrel._
    Wake, wake, poor child, poor child, Elizabeth!

            ELIZABETH.
    What says my dear one? I have been with God.

            TANNHÄUSER (_aside_).
    How shall I speak? A violent good-bye,
    As one distraught, ashamed? I had unbared
    My bosom to these folk, but the sole pride,
    My father’s gift—to be a gentleman—
    Forbade the dying, welcome otherwise,
    At any despicable hands as theirs.
    They, they might boast—we hundred swords or so
    Set on the mighty Tannhäuser, and slew him.
    We, scarce an hundred! Yes, believe it, sirs
    We are not so feeble!—But death anyhow
    Cuts and not loosens the entangled life.
    Be mine the harder and the better way,
    The single chance: not hope; appeal no more;
    Hardly the arrowy wisdom of despair;
    Hardly the cowardice or courage yet
    To drift, nor cursing nor invoking God.

            ELIZABETH.
    I heard, I pure, I virginal, your song;
    The shameful story of your intercourse
    With—fiend or woman? And your burning will.
    Even in that horror, to the Highest; at last
    Your choice of me—the middle course of them,
    Pure human love? And, if your song be true,
    As I, who heard the voice, the earnestness,
    Saw the deep eyes, and truth aflame in them,
    Know—then the choice be Mary’s and not mine!
    I love you better, were that possible;
    Will make you a true wife, and lead your hand,
    Or be led by you, in the pleasant path.
    For me, I enter not—Blesséd be God!—
    In those dark problems that disturb your soul.
    Mine is the simple nature. Look at me!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    O Lady pure, miracle of true love,
    I have a bitter word and harsh to say.
    This is my curse—no sooner do I speak,
    Or formulate my mind in iron words,
    That my mind grows, o’erleaps the limit set,
    And I perceive the truth that lies beyond—
    One further step into a new-fallen night.
    Hear then—I hate to hurt your perfect soul;
    I hate myself because I love you still
    In that strange intermediate consciousness,
    The reason and the mind! This middle way
    Ancients called safe—that damns it instantly!
    Without some danger nothing great is done!
    Let me be God! Or, failing of that task,
    Were it but by an unit, let me fall!
    And, falling, be it from so great a height
    That I may reach some uttermost Abyss,
    Inhabit it and reign, most evil one
    Of all the Horrors there—and in that path
    Seem, even deluded, to approach once more
    Infinity. For all the limitless
    Hath no distinction—evil is no more,
    And good no more.

            ELIZABETH.
                 But God is absolute Good!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    No! He is Not! That negative alone
    Shadows His shadow to our mortal mind.

            ELIZABETH.
    That is too deep; I cannot fathom you.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Define, give utterance to this “Good.” You see
    God slips you, He the Undefinable!
    Not good! Not wise! Not anything at all
    That heart can grasp, or reason frame, or soul
    Shadow the sense of!

            ELIZABETH.
                 He is far too great!
    I see!

            TANNHÄUSER.
          Not great! The consciousness of man
    Their many generations moulded so
    To fix in definite ideas, and clothe
    Their Maker in the rags. If skies are vast,
    So gems are tiny: who shall choose between?
    Who reads the riddle of the Universe?
    All words! Thus, from his rock-wrought peeking-point
    Out speers the hermit. “See, the sun is dead!”
    It shines elsewhere. You from your tiny perch,
    The corner of the corner of the earth,
    Itself a speck in solar life; the sun,
    For all I know, a speck among the stars,
    Themselves one corporate molecule of space!—
    You from your perch judge, label, limit Him!
    Not that your corner is not equally
    The centre and the whole. Fool’s talk it is!
    Consider the futility of mind!
    Realize utterly how mean, how dull,
    How fruitless is Philosophy!

            ELIZABETH.
                           Indeed
    My brain is baffled. But I see your point.
    Talking of God, even imagining,
    Insane! But for aspiring—that I will!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    That is true marriage, in my estimate.
    Aspire together to one Deity?
    Yes! But to love thee otherwise than that?

            ELIZABETH.
    This one thing clearly do I understand:
    We shall not marry. It is well, my lord.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Miserable, miserable me! I bring
    Hate and disruption and unhappiness
    Unto all purity I chance to touch.
    I have no hope but I am fallen now;
    So journey, in this purpose of despair,
    To Lilith and the Venusberg.

            ELIZABETH.
                            Oh no!
    Grant me one boon—the one that I shall ask
    Ever in this world! Promise me!

            TANNHÄUSER.
                               Alas!
    One promise gave I once to woman—that
    Drove me to this illusion of your love,
    And broke your heart.

            ELIZABETH.
                     Oh no, I shall not die.
    Have I not Mary and the angels yet?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    You are so pure, so pitiful—your word
    Cannot bring evil. Yes, I promise you!

            ELIZABETH.
    Go then the bitter pilgrimage to Rome,
    Gain absolution for this piteous past
    From him that owns the twin all-opening keys
    That bar your infinite on either side.
    Then! look with freshness, hope, and fortitude
    Still to the summit—the ideal God.

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I have no hope nor trust in man at all;
    But I will go. Fare well, Elizabeth!
                      [_Going, returns and kneels before her._
    Dare you once kiss these grey and withered brows?
    As ’twere some flower that fell amid my hair,
    The lotus of eternal hope and life.

            ELIZABETH.
    Dare I? I kiss you once upon the brow,
    Praying that God will make the purpose clear,
    And on the eyes—that He may lend them light.
                      [_Tannhäuser rises, and silently departs._
    Oh God! Oh God! That I have loved him so!
    Be merciful! Be merciful! to him,
    The great high soul, bound in the lofty sin;
    To me, the little soul, the little sin!




ACT V.


                        “One birth of my bosom;
                          One beam of mine eye;
                        One topmost blossom
                          That scales the sky.
    Man, equal and one with me, man that is made of me, man that is I.”
                                                          _Hertha._

_A desolate and melancholy wood. Nightfall._

              HEINRICH.
    Well, I am lost! The whistle brings no hound,
    The horn no hunter! North and South are mixed
    In this low twilight and the hanging boughs.
    I have slept worse than this. Poor Tannhäuser!
    I met him walking, as in dream, across
    The courtyard, while behind him skulked that crew
    That lurked, and itched to kill him, him unarmed,
    Not daring! But he reached his hand to me!
    “Good luck, old friend!” and, smiling, he was gone.
    Gone to the Pope—Great soul to mountebank!
    It was her wish, they whisper. Well-a-day!
    He’s gone, and not a friend have I again.
    This bank is soft with delicate white moss,
    No pillow better in broad Germany.
    Were Madeline but here! What rustle stirs
    These leaves? A strong man sobbing! The earth quakes
    Responsive. Hillo-ho! Who comes by there?

    [_Tannhäuser enters. He appears old and worn; but
        from his whole body radiates a dazzling light,
        and his face is that of the Christ crucified._

    Save us, Saints, save us! I have looked on God!

            TANNHÄUSER.
    Heinrich! my friend, my old true-hearted friend!
    Fear not! I am not ghost, but living man!
    Ah me, ah me, the sorrow of the world!

              HEINRICH.
    Thou, Tannhäuser! what miracle is this?
    Your body glows—with what unearthly light?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I did not know. Ah! sorrow of this earth!
    What tears are falling from the Pleiades!
    What sobs tear out Orion’s jewelled heart!
    Ah me! As these, as these!

              HEINRICH.
                           Speak, speak to me!
    Else, I am feared. Why run these tears to earth?
    Why shakes your bosom? Why does glory flame
    A crown, a cincture? What befell you there?

            TANNHÄUSER.
    I came to Rome across the winter snows
    Barefoot, and through the lovely watered land
    Rich in the sunshine—even unto Rome.
    There knelt I with the other sinful folk
    At the great chair of Peter. Sobbed they out
    From full repentant hearts their menial sins,
    And got them peace. But I told brutally
    (Cynical phrase, contempt of self and him)
    My sojourn in the Venusberg; then he
    Rose in his wrath, and shook the barren staff
    Over my head, and cried—I heard his voice
    Most like the dweller of the hurricane
    Calm, small, and still, directing desolation;
    Death to the world athwart its path.—So he
    Cried out upon me “Till this barren staff
    Take life, and bud, and blossom, and bear fruit,
    And shed sweet scent—so long God casteth thee
    Out from His glory!” Stricken, smitten, slain—
    When—one unknown, a pilgrim with the rest,
    Darting long rugged fingers and deep eyes,
    Reached to the sceptre with his word and will—
    Buds, roses, blossoms! Lilies of the Light!
    Bloom, bloom, the fragrance shed upon the air!
    Out flames the miracle of life and love!
    Out, out the lights! Flame, flame, the rushing storm!
    Darkness and death, and glory in my soul!
    Swept, swept away are pope and cardinal,
    Palace and city! There I lay beneath
    The golden roof of the eternal stars,
    Borne up on some irremeable sea
    That glowed with most internal brilliance;
    Borne up, borne up by hands invisible
    Into a firmament of secret light
    Manifest, open, permeating me!
    Then, then, I cried upon the mystic Word!
    (That once begot in me the Venusberg)
    And lo! that light was darkness—in the face
    Of That which gleamed above. And verily
    My life was borne on the dark stream of death
    Down whirling aeons, linked abysses, columns
    Built of essential time. And lo! the light
    Shed from Her shoulders whom I dimly saw;
    Crowned with twelve stars and hornéd as the moon;
    Clothed with a sun to which the sun of earth
    Were tinsel; and the moon was at Her feet—
    A moon whose brilliance breaks the sword of song
    Into a million fragments; so transcends
    Music, that starlight-sandalled majesty!
    Then—shall I contemplate the face of Her?
    O Nature! Self-begotten! Spouse of God,
    The Glory of thy Countenance unveiled!
    Thy face, O mother! Splendour of the Gods!
    Behold! amid the glory of her hair
    And light shed over from the crown thereof,
    Wonderful eyes less passionate than Peace
    That wept! That wept! O mystery of Love!
    Clasping my hands upon the scarlet rose
    That flamed upon my bosom, the keen thorns
    Pierced me and slew! My spirit was withdrawn
    Into Her godhead, and my soul made One
    With the Great Sorrow of the Universe,
    The Love of Isis! Then I fell away
    Into some old mysterious abyss
    Rolling between the heights of starry space;
    Flaming above, beyond the Tomb of Time,
    Blending the darkness into the profound
    Chasms of matter—so I fell away
    Through many strange eternities of Space,
    Limitless fields of Time. I knew in me
    That I must fall into the ground and die;
    Dwell in the deep a-many years, at last
    To rise again—Osiris, slain and risen!
    Light of the Cross, I see Thee in the sky,
    My future! I must perish from the earth,
    Abide in desolate halls, until the hour
    When a new Christ must needs be crucified.—
    So weep I ever with Our Lady’s tears,
    Weep for the pain, the travail, the old curse;
    Weep, weep, and die. So dawns at last the Grail,
    The Glory of the Crucified! Dear friend,
    Be happy, for my heart goes out to you,
    And most to that poor pale Elizabeth—
    Were it not only that the selflessness
    That fills me now, forbids the personal,
    Casts out the individual, and weeps on
    For the united sorrow of all things.
    For if I die, it is not Tannhäuser,
    Rather a spark of the supreme white light
    That dwelt and flickered in him in old time;
    That Light, I say, that hides its flame awhile
    To shine more fully—to redeem the world!
    I say, then, “I”; and yet it is not “I”
    Distinct, but “I” incorporate in All.
    I am, the Resurrection and the Life!
    The Work is finished, and the Night rolled back!
    I am the Rising Sun of Life and Light,
    The Glory of the Shining of the Dawn!
    I am Osiris! I the Lord of Life
    Triumphant over death.—

    O Sorrow, Sorrow, Sorrow of the World!

              HEINRICH.
    This was my friend. Deep night descends, perfused
    With unsubstantial glory from beyond.
    The stars are buried in the mist of light.
    Beyond the hill the world is, and laments
    Existence—the wide firmament of woe!
    And he—his heart was great enough for all,
    The fall of sparrows as the crash of stars,
    The tears of lonely forests, and the pain
    Of the least atom—all were in his heart.
    Was that indeed the truth? that he should come
    At last a Christ upon the waiting world,
    Redeem it to more purpose than the last!
    So fills his sorrow, and Her sympathy,
    My common soul, that I am fain to fall
    Upon my face, and cry aloud to God:
    “O Thou, Sole Wise, Sole Pure, Sole Merciful,
    Who hast thus shewn Thy mystery to man:
    Grant that his coming may be very soon!”
    See, the sobs shake me like a little child.
    The moon is crescent, waxing in the West.
    Take the last kiss, dear.

                         What is the strange song?

    [_The great Goddess ariseth, weeping for the
        slain Osiris Tannhäuser._

                 ISIS.
    Isis am I, and from my life are fed
      All stars and suns, all moons that wax and wane,
    Create and uncreate, living and dead,
      The Mystery of Pain.
    I am the Mother, I the silent Sea,
      The Earth, its travail, its fertility.
    Life, death, love, hatred, light, darkness, return to me—
        To Me!

     TURNBULL AND SPEARS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.

          _BY THE SAME AUTHOR_

    ACELDAMA.      [_Out of print_.
    SONGS OF THE SPIRIT.
    THE TALE OF ARCHAIS.
    JEPHTHAH AND OTHER MYSTERIES, &c.
    JEZEBEL.      [_Out of print_.
    AN APPEAL TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
    THE MOTHER’S TRAGEDY, &c. (_Privately Printed._)
    CARMEN SAECULARE.
    THE SOUL OF OSIRIS.

                             PRESS NOTICES

              “GOLDEN OPINIONS FROM ALL SORTS OF PEOPLE”

“A windbag foaming at the mouth.”

“How rich and melodious are many of his poems, besides being full of
powerful and original thought.”

“Exquisite stanzas ... many faults.”

“Remarkable mastery of form.”

“Nearly akin to verbiage ... he has imagination and not infrequently
the poet’s touch.”

“Intense spirituality ... technical superiorities ... an utterance at
once mysterious and vivid ... an impressive and original voice ...
fiery and clear measured and easy of phrasing.”

“Always melodiously ... sometimes nonsensically.”

“A sinister rival to the mutoscope.”

“Self-revelation of an intensely passionate nature, expressed with a
rare command of poetic form ... largely Pagan in sentiment.”

“Clever imitations of a brilliant yet somewhat leprous style ... gilded
nastiness.”

“Veils a morbidly exaggerated Catholicism under an ultra-Egyptian
passion for death.... Aleister Crowley is a true poet.”

“We quote ... There is a good deal of similar drivel further on.”

“Real and striking gifts both of imagination and expression.”

“Mr Crowley out-Swinburne’s Mr Swinburne.... Shows no mean technical
accomplishment.”

“The pupil is in some ways greater than the master (Mr Swinburne).”

“Most exalted moods of mysticism ... richness and visionary splendour
of the imagery and the aptness and transfiguring power of the rhythms
... plastic and intensely dramatic ... this poet is authentic and will
reveal to the world much new beauty....”

“A kind of middle-class Swinburne at second-hand ... morbid
unpleasantness of Mr Crowley’s taste.”

“Much to attract and not a little to repel. A very singular and
striking piece of work ... undoubted power and originality ... vigorous
mastery and daring conception ... we are compelled to read even where
the subject matter fails to attract ... several glaring crudities and
much banality.”

“An unusual number of gory phantoms.”

“A trifle ludicrous and monotonous.”

“A riot of words without much thought at the back of them ... windy and
boyish in over-emphasis ... very respectable verse.”

“Earliest and worst manner of Keats ... no new note here. Even the
epithets are conventional....”

“Lacks utterly originality ... echoes of Mr Swinburne, Tennyson, and
sometimes of Mr Gilbert.”

“Sickly, sensuous vein.”

“Holds the first place among the latter-day poets.”

“The fairest promise of not only good but great work to come ... has
the prophet’s vision ... verse worthy of the greatness of his theme ...
all the attributes of a true poet.”

“Elaborate and perverse ... the most irresistible trait he can find in
a maiden is that she should bite like a mad dog ... Mr Crowley is a
strong and genuine poet.”






Graphics and textual content produced by Lolaness.




HOUSEHOLD GODS

A Comedy By Aleister Crowley

[Privately Printed in 1912]


TO LEILA WADDELL





SCENE

THE HEARTH OF CRASSUS;
AFTERWARDS THE LAWNS, THE WOODS, THE LAKE, THE ISLE.



CHARACTERS

CRASSUS, a barbarian from Britain.
ADELA, his wife, a noble Roman lady.
ALICIA, a servant in the house.
A STATUE OF PAN.
A FAUN.




HOUSEHOLD GODS

THE SCENE is at the hearth of CRASSUS, where is a little
bronze altar dedicated to the Lares and Penates. A pale
flame rises from the burning sandal-wood, on which CRASSUS
throws benzoin and musk. He is standing in deep dejection.

CRASSUS.
Smoke without fire!
  No thrill of tongues licks up
  The offerings in the cup.
Dead falls desire.

Black smoke thou art,
  O altar-flame, that dost dismember,
  Devour the hearth, to leave no ember
To warm this heart.

I see her still -
  Adela dancing here
  Till dim gods did appear
To work our will.

The delicate girl!
  Diaphanous gossamer
  Subtly revealing her
Brave breast of pearl!

Now - she's withdrawn
  At dusk to the wild woods,
  Mystic beatitudes
That dure till dawn.

Let life exclaim
  Against these things of spirit,
  Mankind that disinherit
Of love's pure flame!
[He bends before the altar and begins to weep.]

Ye household gods!
  By these male tears I swear
  That ye shall grant this prayer.
All things at odds

Shall be put straight -
  Harmonized, reconciled
  By some appointed child
Of some far Fate!
[A curtain has been drawn aside during this invocation, and
ALICIA advances. She smiles subtly upon him; and, giving a
strange gesture, makes one or two noiseless steps of dancing.]

ALICIA.
Master still sad?

CRASSUS.
These faint and fearful shores
  Of time are beaten by the surge of sense,
  Love worn away - by love? - to indifference.
Who knows what god - or demon - she adores?
  Or in what wood she shelters, or what grove
  Sees her profane our sacrament of love?

ALICIA.
I saw her follow
The stream in the hollow
Where never Apollo
  Abides.
So thick are the trees
That never the breeze
Stirs them, or sees
  What satyr inhabits the glen, what nymph in the
    pools of it hides.

Lighter of foot
  Than a sylph or a fairy,
  Sinuous, wary,
  I passed from the airy
Lawns, where the flute
  Of the winds made tremulous music for man.

I followed the ripple
  Of the stream; I crept
  Where the waters wept -
    The floss in the foss
    Gurgling across
    The bosses of moss,
Like a dryad's nipple
  In the mouth of Pan!

CRASSUS.
O pearl of the house! you came to the end?

ALICIA.
The dusk of the slave, the dawn of a friend?

CRASSUS.
Freedom is thine for the skill and the will.

ALICIA.
The skill is mine - but the will lies still,
Still as the earth that dare not stir
Till the kiss of the sun awaken her!

CRASSUS.
Yet at these secrets and riddles? Behold!
I can fill thy lap with a harvest of gold.

ALICIA.
Yet all the gold you could give to me
Would fall at my feet when I rose to be free.

CRASSUS.
What will you then?

ALICIA.
No gift from men.
Of my own free will I give you wit,
(O man so sorely in need of it!)
And happiness; and the flame that hath dwindled
On this dull hearth shall be rekindled.
But this you must swear:
To will, and to dare,
To seek the spirit and slay the sense;
  And for this hour
  To give me power
To lead you in silent obedience,
Though I bade you fall on your sword....

CRASSUS.
                        Enough!
I give my life as I gave my love.

ALICIA.
O! love you have not understood.
You have not guessed its secret food.
You have not seen its single eye;
But fear and doubt and jealousy
Have risen, and now your love is trembling
Like a mountebank dissembling
When his trick's detected. Come!
To find home we must leave home.

CRASSUS.
Starless and moonless, hidden in cloud,
The night's one flame of pearl.

ALICIA.
The bat flaps; the owl hoots aloud.

CRASSUS.
Lead on; I trust you, girl.

ALICIA.
You are bold to trust me; or, have you divined
My secret?

CRASSUS.
No; the crystal of your mind
Shows only faint disturbing images,
Things passing strange, as if enchanted seas
Kept their great swell upon it, and strange fish
Played in its oily depths. Some monstrous wish,
The shadow of some unspeakable desire,
Strikes my heart cold, and sets my brain on fire.

ALICIA.
Learn this, as we pass through the portico:
Fear nothing; there is nothing you can know!
And by these terraces and steps that gleam
Wintry, although the summer night is hot,
This - what we seek is never what we find!

Life is a dream, like love; and from the dream
If we may wake, we never find it what
We would; for the wisdom of a mightier mind
Leads us in its own ways
To a perfected praise.

CRASSUS.
Why are these shadows thrown across the lawn
From the elms and yews? They were not wont to reach
Beyond the branches of that copper-beech.

ALICIA.
Attend the dawn
Of an unknown comet, that shall come
From the unfathomable wells of space
Into its halidom.

CRASSUS.
I know it not. Last night I walked alone
Here, and saw nothing.

ALICIA.
                        I was not with you!
There is no God upon the eternal throne
Of stars begemming the bewildering blue
Unless one has the eyes to see him. Think
How we two stand upon the brink
Of nothing! Here's a globe, whereto we trust,
No larger than the smallest speck of dust
Or mote in the sunbeam is to that sun's self,
And we are like dead leaves in autumn's whil
Of wind upon it.

CRASSUS.
                        Mystify me, girl!
It is the right of an elf.
Surely your flickering fire
Will draw me to some mire!

ALICIA.
Here the stream dips its mouth into the wood.
So does youth's calm and chaste beatitude
Touch the black mouth of Love, the ancient whore.

CRASSUS.
Girl! what a scorpion leaping from your lips!

ALICIA.
My mouth stings as no scorpion ever stang.
in this round impudent smiling face of mine
There is a poison fiercer than all wine;
And from these eyes more subtle sorrows pour
Than you can dream. These teeth have been at grips
With gods; I have sung what no girl ever sang.
These ears have heard
An insufferable word!

CRASSUS.
What do you mean?

ALICIA.
                        The secret's in a kiss.
Here are no kisses. Here great Artemis
Rules; only in the woodland may a man
Hide his eyes from her, pledge himself to Pan.
Come! through the tangled arches
Of cypresses and larches,
Stoop; under Artemis we walked upright;
But this is Pan's home, and the House of Night.
                        [They enter the wood.]

CRASSUS.
So when I stoop, my cheek comes close to yours.
Give me a kiss.

ALICIA.
The poisonous apple lures
Thus the boy's mouth. Beware!

CRASSUS.
O you are fair!
Fairer than ever! In this tangle of trees
Your hot breath wraps you in perfume.

ALICIA.
There is some gloom or doom,
A bitter harsh ingredient
In these my sorceries
Of animal scent.

CRASSUS.
Yes! there is fear mixed with the fascination.
It is the reverence that chastity, be sure!
Gains from the impure.

ALICIA.
O virtuous nation!
It is the fear of the uninitiate
Before the throne of Fate
The hierophant.

CRASSUS.
Kiss me, however!

ALICIA.
Did I grant
This favour, all were lost. It is your truth
To Adela that tempts my youth.
                [Henceforth Alicia shakes with silent laughter.]

CRASSUS.
What little breasts you have!

ALICIA.
Ay, maiden breasts!
Would you betray my oath?

CRASSUS.
My will contests
My wishes.

ALICIA.
Wait, and you shall surely see
Part of the secret that ensorcels me.
See all these bosses! It is not
As if a Titan smote himself into the earth,
And was caught into her, made one with her?

CRASSUS.
The scent is fierce and hot
Like a rutting panther's slot.
Yet you are matched with mirth,
Shaking each other like two wrestlers.

ALICIA.
What should stir
Your melancholy but laughter?

CRASSUS.
Look, before us
Light streams, a tremulous chorus.
Oh, it is vague and vacillating!

ALICIA.
Love,
Young love of maidens, is the soul thereof.
And in the midst, behold, O man!
The image of great Pan.

CRASSUS.
I fear him.

ALICIA.
Go and lie there, at his feet.
Lie supine! Lie on that moss-covered root,
While I draw forth the flute
And make a marvellous music.
                        [She ceases laughing and begins to play.]

CRASSUS.
O I writhe
Beneath the force of lips, of fingers lithe
That touch the delicate stops so delicately.

ALICIA.
Hush!
I have drawn the bird from the bush.
Pan will appear anon.

CRASSUS.
Ah! Ah! ... Ah! Ah!

ALICIA.
This music moves you. Now I'll play a tune
That would make mad the melancholy moon.
This.

CRASSUS.
Ah! you tear my soul out with the trills.
Your fingers play like summer lightning on the shaft.
It is like a storm on the mountains when it shrills;
Like the angry sea when it booms. Hark!

ALICIA.
Some god laughed.

CRASSUS.
Your mouth is like some god's It burns and blooms
With fire unheard of, with unguessed perfumes.
O let me kiss you!

ALICIA.
So you stop my song!
                        [She ceases the tune.]

CRASSUS.
There is another song.

ALICIA.
You do me wrong.
For you love Adela!

CRASSUS.
By God, girl, no!
I love Alicia.

ALICIA.
Ah! you love her SO! [She laughs]

CRASSUS.
Your laugh is shocking - why do you mock me, dear?

ALICIA.
Because you will not guess my secret here.
But - put your arms about my neck, and swar
You love me, and will always keep them there.
Then I might dare.

CRASSUS.
I swear it. O my sweet!

ALICIA.
Then take my kiss.

CRASSUS.
Your mouth is like a rose of fire. But what is this?
I cannot bear it.

ALICIA.
Ai! Uhu! Uhu!
It is my heart; this arrow strikes me through.
Stir not one muscle for a moment. Death!
You beast, you kill me with your urgent breath.

CRASSUS.
O how I love you! [He moves violently.]

ALICIA.
Fool! Now all my pain
Must be gone through again.
It is sure your chastity's unstained by crime;
You do the wrong thing just at the right time!

CRASSUS.
Why do you taunt me? All the wood is spring's,
And love is hovering o'er us with his wings.

ALICIA.
Sub pennis, penis!

CRASSUS.
Hush! you break the spell.

ALICIA.
Oh! you great fools fo men, I know you well.
But nothing is so detrimental
To love as to be sentimental.
I will yet make you wise.
Know that I have the magic to disguise
Myself in manyt ways. Do you feel this?
(Lie still, this heaven were ruined by a kiss!)
I am a butterfly, such idle flitting
As to a flower like you is fitting
Now I'm a mole. Do you think you know me now?
Here is the earthworm severed by the plough.

CRASSUS.
You are a witch. I want your love; you give
Only love's comedy.

ALICIA.
The way to live
Is to find comedy and tragedy
In everything. But if you cannot see
Through to the Bacchanal spirit, this should suit.
Here is the blacksmith hammering a flute.

CRASSUS.
Oh love, love, kiss me!

ALICIA.
I will forge a ring
Of bloom of blood-kisses upon your neck,
Till it is like a garden of roses in late spring.

CRASSUS.
"Soft, and stung softly, fairer for a fleck."

ALICIA.
O marvellous nation!
Vanity, dullness, slobber, and quotation!

CRASSUS.
Why do you love me if you scorn me so?

ALICIA.
Why, did I say I loved you? I say no.

CRASSUS.
Why do you make love?

ALICIA.
To beguile the hour;
To crown my rose-wreath with a greener flower'
To do my master's bidding, that's to give
Life to yourself, who only think you live.
But listen! Have you seen the nine waves roll
Monotonous upon the shoal,
Rising and falling like a maiden asleep;
Then with a lift and a leap
The ninth wave curls, and breaks upon the beach,
And rushes up it, swallowing the sand?
I am that ocean.... Now, you understand?

CRASSUS.
Alicia! O! this is unbearable.
Surely this wave washes the shore of hell!

ALICIA.
Each follows each
Remorseless and indifferent as Nature
Is to each creature.

CRASSUS.
Wonderful, wonderful woman!
                        [She throws her head back, and laughs]

ALICIA.
Now, you think
You know my secret. I have given you drink,
And you are wise. But hush! to all emotion
Save this the pulse and swell of Ocean
For at the last with mouth and fingers wried
All must proclaim the triumph of the tide.

CRASSUS.
Ah! still you mock me with your cruel laugh.

ALICIA.
It is your foolish epitaph.

CRASSUS.
But this can be no mockery. Heave and sway
And curl and thrust - these waves are not at play.

ALICIA.
You feel the ocean breaking on the shoal;
But passionless and moveless is its soul.

CRASSUS.
Ah! but your soul is in your breath.

ALICIA.
Only as the graven image of death
Which men call life, and ignorantly adore!

CRASSUS.
Spare me! I cannot bear you more.

ALICIA.
Then will I drown you. Lock your fingers fast
In mind, and let our mouths mix at the last.
                        [The stuatue of PAN is seen to be alive.]

PAN.
Shrill, shrill
Over the hill!
The hunter is hot - this is the kill!
Scream! Scream!
Dissolving the dream
Of life, the knife to the heart of the wife!
The fountain jets
Its flood of blood,
And the moss that it wets
Is an amethyst flame of violets.

Who shall escape
Murder and rape
What I am alive in my solemn shape?
Shrill, shrill,
Over the hill!
The hunter is hot - this is the kill!
The heart of the home
Is a fury of foam;
The storm is awake, and the billows comb.
But though I be
Their frenzy of glee,
I am also the passionless soul of the sea!

Mine eyes glint fire,
And my cruel lips curl;
Mine the desire
Of the god and the girl;
But fierier and fleeter,
And subtler and sweeter
Than the race of the rhythm, the march of the metre,
Is the shrilling, shrilling
Of the knife in the killing
That ends, when it must,
(O the throb and the thrust!)
In a death, in the dust,
The silence, the stillness, of satiate lust,
The solemn pause
When the veil withdraws
And man looks on his god, on the Causeless Cause.
Still, still,
Under the hill!
The hunter is dead - this is the kill!

CRASSUS.
Pan spoke.

ALICIA.
Pan never speaks till man is dumb,
And only then if he be like a child
Silently curled within its mother's womb,
Or feeding at her breast. There is a wild
Way also - when his dumbness is of death.
And there's a first and second death. Remember
To die so that no god's or angel's breath
May quicken into life the wasted ember!

CRASSUS.
I am dead now.

ALICIA.
But I must raise you up.
The night grows darker; all Pan's light is gone,
And you and I are pledged to sup
Upon a secret.

CRASSUS.
All your secret shone.
                        [She laughs again.]

ALICIA.
Oh, when you know it! But you must divine
Adela's shrine.

CRASSUS.
I am weary of Adela grown chaste and chill.

ALICIA.
The hunter lags; how heavy is the hill!
But you are bound to Adela.

CRASSUS.
To you!

ALICIA.
But you have given me freedom. I will leave you.

CRASSUS.
What have I done to grieve you?

ALICIA.
You have been the solemn fool with face awry
That I have gathered in my ecstasy.
You are only a vulgar primrose I have plucked.

CRASSUS.
At least, she-devil, you have been well-treated.

ALICIA.
O tragic farce - not even rimes completed!
Nay, darling! no rebellion. When you know
My secret, you will understand. You are bound
To Adela within the portico,
To me upon this ground.
By day, in life, adore the Lares, man!
By night, in deaht, make offering to Pan!
Can you cut day from night by any endeavour?
If so, both life and death were lost for ever.
Come, the stream steepens.

CRASSUS.
This road leads to hell.

ALICIA.
The way to heaven is shorter.

CRASSUS.
Who can tell?

ALICIA.
I have measured it.

CRASSUS.
You, girl?

ALICIA.
It is not hard.

CRASSUS.
What did you make the height of it?

ALICIA.
One yard.

CRASSUS.
You always mock me?

ALICIA.
Pity of my youth!
I swerve not from, you stumble at, the truth.

CRASSUS.
I like not jests. This is a serious journey.

ALICIA.
Why did you make a mocker your attorney?
The way to Rome leads through the Apennines.
Bacchus has horns beneath the crown of vines.
If you fear horns, make some polite excuse
Not to invoke him by the name Zagreus!

A FAUN [Passing among the trees].
Ye thought me a lamb
  With a crown of thorns;
I am royal, a ram
  With death in my horns.
So mild and soft
  And feminine,
Ye held me aloft
  And frowned on sin!
But I was awake
  In your clasp as I lay;
I roused the snake
  From its nest of clay;
And ere ye knew
  I had sunk my forehead
Through and through;
  Harsh and horrid
Through all the pleasure
  Of rose and vine
I thrust my treasure,
  The cone of the pine.
Irru's maid
  Was easily sated,
For she was afraid
  When Irru mated!

CRASSUS.
Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha!

ALICIA.
You would not laugh
Were you the maid!

CRASSUS.
How could I be?

ALICIA.
Great calf!
But you are all the same, blaspheme and jeer
At any mystery beyond your sphere
Of beer, and beef, and beer, and beef, and beer.
Now you have frightened the shy god!

CRASSUS.
Why heed?
Between your - arms - is all the god I need.

ALICIA.
Prudish and coarse to the last. Now hush indeed!
The stream kisses the lake. We near the shrine.
Stir no snapped twig. Let your foot - even yours -
Fall like a fawn's.

CRASSUS.
Your breath is like new wine.

ALICIA.
Hush now! no porpoise gambols!

CRASSUS.
How obscure's
The glimmer of the lake. Is that the isle?

ALICIA.
Yes! in that shadow lurks a smile.
See; from that jagged cloud Diana starts
Like a deer from the brake; her silver splendour darts
Through the crisp air to the grove upon the isle...
Do you see her? Do you see her?

CRASSUS.
Monstrous! Vile!
These eyes betray me.

ALICIA.
No! your Adela lies
With arms thrown back, head tilted, open thighs.
Her lips flame out like poppies in the dusk.
The breeze brings back to us a scent of musk.
Her mouth is oozing kisses!

CRASSUS.
Filthy harlot!

ALICIA.
I never fed on a superber scarlet.
And look! the wonder of plumes that foams upon
Her tidal breast - oh, but a swan! a swan!
A swan snow-white with his sole scarlet hidden
In the abode forbidden!

O but his eye swoons as his broad beak slips
Within her luscious lips.
O but - I cannot see - I long to die
Alike for wonder - and for jealousy!

CRASSUS.
Vile, filthy whore! I'll catch you at it.

ALICIA.
Soft!
See how his feathers hold her soul aloft!

CRASSUS.
Beast! Have you brought me through the wood for
  this?

ALICIA.
Now wonder I must teach you how to kiss.

CRASSUS.
I'll clip his wings.

ALICIA.
Sub pennis, penis! 'Slife!
It's not the wings of him that clip your wife.

CRASSUS.
Thou art as filthy a creature as she!

ALICIA.
Fat fool!
All your emotions vary with your -

CRASSUS.
        What?

ALICIA.
Your state of health.

CRASSUS.
Be off with you, foul --

ALICIA.
Well?

CRASSUS.
I'll swim and stab them. The black mouth of hell
Yawns for their murder.

ALICIA.
I'll be at the death.
Dive then, but softly. Scarcely draw your breath.

CRASSUS.
O, she's unwary!

ALICIA.
Is your love forgotten?

CRASSUS.
All love is rotten.

ALICIA.
But your pure love for me you boasted of?

CRASSUS.
Ay, that was perfect love.

ALICIA.
You love me then, not her?

CRASSUS.
Indeed I do.

ALICIA.
Swear me the oath anew!

CRASSUS.
I swear to love you till the world shall end.

ALICIA.
Then, Crassus, I will always be your friend.

CRASSUS.
Ah, that is good! You do not mock me now!

ALICIA.
Creep softly to the land. Kiss but my brow.
My curls are wet... No, never touch me there!

CRASSUS.
Why? Have I not?

ALICIA.
You have not.

CRASSUS.
Just my hand.

ALICIA.
You disobey your mistress's command?
The time is near when you shall see
The keyhole of my comedy!

CRASSUS.
Ha! Ha! Ha!

ALICIA.
Hush, you coarse slave; we'll surprise
Your good wife in her mystic exercise.
Quick, through the bramble!
                        [They burst through upon ADELA.]

CRASSUS.
Now, you beast, I've got you!
The curst of God, and plague of Naples, rot you!
For this white brute - one slit!
                        [He cuts the throat of THE SWAN with
                        his dagger.]

ADELA.
Oh love betrayed!
O my dead beauty! Faugh! deceitful maid.
Not Crassus found me out. Had I the wings
Of my dead love - oh love! -

ALICIA.
Why, wondrous things!

ADELA.
These nails shall serve. A servant!

CRASSUS.
She shall be
My wife, damned witch, when I have done with thee!
                        [THE SWAN dies.]

ADELA.
I'll kill her now. But see! my swan is dead.

ALICIA.
Yes! and what light is breaking overhead?
What blaze of blue and gold envelops us?

CRASSUS.
O marvel! O miraculous!

ADELA.
What is it? Why, my lover's life, in me
Once concentrated, now diffused, illumes
The endless reaches of eternity
With infinite brilliance, with intense perfumes.

ALICIA.
O then your lover was some god's disguise.

ADELA.
And you have robbed me. Now beware your eyes!
                        [She springs at ALICIA, who guards herself
                        easily. But in the struggle her robe tears.]

ALICIA.
Take care!

ADELA.
A boy!

CRASSUS.
A boy! Then what am I?

ALICIA.
That is the key-word of the comedy.
You thought you had two vices at your need;
But she had Jove and you had Ganymede.
                        [They are struck dumb and still with
                        amazement. ALICIA claps her hands four times.]

Sweep through the air, bright blaze of eagle-wings!
Crassus, sub pennis, penis! How he swings
His bulk from yonder sightless poise, to bear
me back to the Dominion of the air
Where I shall bear the cup of Jupiter!
Blind babes, love one another, no less true
Because the gods have deigned to dwell with you!
                        [The eagle bears GANYMEDE aloft.]

CRASSUS.
Adela! these mysteries too great
For you and me to estimate.
But, widowed both, come, seek domestic charms
As we were wont, in one another's arms!
What perfect moss for you to lie upon!

ADELA.
I am your wife, dear Crassus.
        (sotto voce) Oh, my swan!


CURTAIN.









PREFACE

BY THE REVD. C. VEREY

"Receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet."

So wrote the great apostle nearly two thousand years ago; and surely in these latter days, when Satan seems visibly loosed upon earth, the words have a special and dreadful significance even for us who—thanks be to God for His unspeakable mercy!—are washed in the blood of the Lamb and freed from the chains of death—and of hell.

Surely this terrible history is a true Sign of the Times. We walk in the last days, and all the abominations spoken of by the apostle are freely practised in our midst. Nay! they are even the boast and the defence of that spectre of evil, Socialism.

The awful drama which the unhappy wretch who penned these horrible utterances has to unfold is alas! too common. Its study may be useful to us as showing the logical outcome of Atheism and Free Love.

For the former, death; for the latter, the death-in-life of a frightful, loathsome, shameful disease.

"Receiving in themselves that recompense of their error which was meet".

It may seem almost incredible to many of us, perhaps safely established in our comfortable cures, among a simple and Godfearing people, that any man should have been found to pen the disgusting blasphemies, the revolting obscenities, which defile these pages.

Nor can it be denied that a certain power of expression, even at times a certain felicity of phrasing—always, indeed, a profound dramatic feeling—is to be found in these poems. Alas! that we should be compelled to write the words! That an art essentially spiritual, an art dignified by the great names of Gascoigne Mackie, Christina Rossetti, Alfred Tennyson, George Herbert, should here be prostituted to such "ignoble use". Truly the corruption of the best is the lowest—corruptio optimi pessima. Nor can one gleam of Hope, even in the infinite mercy of our loving Father, tinge with gold the leprous gloom of our outlook.

These clouds without water have no silver lining.

The unhappy man need not have feared that the poor servants of God would claim him as repentant, though surely we would all have shed the last drop of our blood to bring him to the grace of God. Alas! it was not to be.

The devilish precautions of this human fiend excluded all such possibilities. He died as he had lived, no doubt. Alas! no doubt.

Where is now that spotted soul? There is but one appalling answer to the question. In the "place prepared for the devil and his angels"; for "he that believeth not is condemned already".

Not even in that modern evasion, the plea of insanity, can we find any hope. Nothing is clearer than that these wretched victims of Satan were in full possession of their faculties to the last moment.

Surely the maniacal violence of their unhallowed lust and hate is no ground for pity but for reprobation. When our blessed Lord was on earth He made no excuses for those who were possessed of devils. He took this simply as a fact—and He healed them.

It is only the shocking atheism and materialism or modern science that, in an insane endeavour to whittle away the miracles of our blessed Saviour, has sought to include "possession" in the category of disease.

Our Lord had no doubts as to the reality of demoniacal possession; why should we, His humble servants, truckle to the Christless cant of an atheistical profession?

The facts of this shocking case are familiar enough in the drawing-rooms of the West End.

Both the characters in the story were persons of considerable education and position.

On this account, and because a statement of the truth (however guarded) would have compromised persons of high rank, and was in any case too disgusting to publish in the press, the tragedy has not—one is glad to say in these days of yellow prurience—become matter for public comment.

But the wife of the man, driven to drink and prostitution by the inhuman cruelty of his mistress—this modern worse than Lucrezia Borgia or Mdme de Brinvilliers—and the fiancé of the girl betrayed and ruined by her machinations, still haunt the purlieus of the Strand, the one an unfortunate of the lowest order, the other a loafer and parasite upon the ghouls that traffic in human flesh and shame.

Thus we see evil reproducing itself, spreading like an incurable cancer throughout society from one germ of infidelity and unhallowed lust.

I may perhaps be blamed for publishing, even in this limited measure, such filthy and blasphemous orgies of human speech (save the mark) but I am firmly resolved (and I believe that I have the blessing of God on my work) to awake my fellow-workers in the great vineyard to the facts of modern existence.

Unblushing, the old Serpent rears its crest to the sky; unashamed, the Beast and the Scarlet Woman chant the blasphemous litanies of their fornication.

Surely the cup of their abominations is nigh full!

Surely we who await the Advent of our blessed Lord are emboldened to trust that this frenzy of wickedness is a sure sign of the last days; that He will shortly come—whose fan is in His hand, wherewith He shall throughly purge His floor—and take us His saints—however failing and humble we may be—to be with Him in His glory for ever and ever, while those who have rejected Himburn in eternal torment, with wailing and gnashing of teeth, in that Lake of Fire and Brimstone from which—thank God! He in His infinite mercy hath delivered us.

But until that happy day we are bound to work on silently and strenuously in His service.

May the perusal of these atrocious words enlighten us as to the very present influence of Satan in this world—naked and unashamed,

May it show us the full horror of the Enemy with whom we are bound to fight; may it reveal his dispositions, so that under our great Captain we may again and again win the Victory.

It is my prayerful hope that He who turns evil to good may indeed use to His glory even this terrible and wicked book.

It has cost me much to read it; to meditate on it has been a terrible shame and trial; to issue it, much against my own poor human judgment, in obedience to His will, has been a still harder task; were it permitted me to ask a recompense, I would ask none but that of His divine blessing upon my fellow-labourers in His great field.

C. V.

The Manuscript

We dedicate this record of our

loves

to

the memory of

MARGUERITE PORRETE

I

Dieu libre et libertin, sacrifice et hommage;
De ma virginité recevez les louanges\!
Votre empire triomphe sur mon pucelage,
Paradis de la boue, empire de la fange\!
Dieu libre et libertin, sacrifice et hommage.

II

Chez vous les crimes infàmes ne sont que des blagues;
Chez vous, mon Dieu, les dieux ne sont que des idées.
Frappez votre esclave! Ah! le sang qui coule en vagues
La comblera de joie, éventrée et pâmée.
Chez vous les crimes infâmes ne sont que des blagues.

III

Satyre se moquant des femmes légitimes,
La mort est une blague, et l'amour trop comique.
Vois êtes un dieu! pour vous les seules choses intimes,
Dieu qui m'a baisé tant! sont les choses cosmiques.
Satyre se moquant des femmes légitimes\!

IV

Dieu qui m'a baisé tant! Baisez-moi donc encore\!
Vois m'avez rendu ma chère virginité.
C'est pourquoi follement sous vous, ah! je me tords
Eros inconnu, masque illisible et doré\!
Dieu qui m'a baisé tant! Baisez-moi donc encore\!

V

Vous qui vous dressez sur l'abîme de l'enfer,
Vous dont les plumes gravissent le haut des cieux,
A moi la bouche d'or, à moi le v.. de fer\!
A l'âme, au corps! je suis la déesse des dieux—
Et je me dresse sur l'abîme de l'enfer.

A

Queanof the

Qualitybeing the

Quatorzainsof a

Quietist

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

A TERZAIN

King of myself, I labour to espouse
An equal soul. Alas! how frail I find
The golden light within the gilded house.
Helpless and passionate, and weak of mind\!
Lechers and lepers!—all as ivy cling,
Emasculate the healthy bole they haunt.
Eternity is pregnant; I shall sing
Now—by my power—a spirit grave and gaunt
Brilliant and selfish, hard and hot, to flaunt
Reared like a flame across the lampless west,
Until by love or laughter we enchaunt,
Compel ye to Kithairon's thorny crest—
Evoe! Iacche! consummatum est.

The Augur

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Look! Look! upon the tripod through the smoke
 Of slain things kindled, and fine frankincense.
 Look—deep beyond the phantoms these evoke
 Are sightless halls where spirit stifles sense.
There do I open the old book of Fate
 Wherein They pictured my delight and me
 Flushed with the dawn of rapture laureate
 And leaping with the laughter of ecstacy.
Mine eyes grow aged with that hieroglyph
 Of doom that I have sought: the fatal end.
 That which is written is written, even if
 Great Zeus himself—great Zeus!—were to befriend.
Even in the spring of the first floral kiss:
 "No happy end the gods have given for this".

II

Save death alone! I see no happy end,
 No happy end for this divine beginning.
 Child! let us front a fate too ill to mend,
 Take joy in suffering for the sake of sinning.
Ay! from your lips I pluck the purple seed
 Of that pomegranate sleek Persephone
 Tasted in hell; the irrevocable deed
 I do, and it is done. Naught else could be
For us, the chosen of so severe a god
 To act so high a tragedy, the elect
 To suffer so, and so rejoice, the rod
 And scourge of our own shame, the gilt and decked
Oxen that go to our own sacrifice
 At our own consecrated shrine of vice.

III

Over the desert ocean of distress
 We reach pale eager hands that quiver and bleed
 With life of these our hearts that surge and stress
 In agony of the mediated deed.
For in the little coppice by the gate
 Wherein I drew you shy and sly, and kised
 Your lips, your hushed "I love you" smooth and straight
 Sweeping to wrap us in the glittering mist
Of hell that holds us—even there I heard
 The lacerating laugh of fate ring out,
 The dog-faced god pronounce the mantic word,
 And saw the avengers gather round about
Our love. The Mairae neither break nor bend;
 The Erinyes hunt us to—no happy end.

IV

Our love is like a glittering sabre bloodied
 With lives of me; upsoared the sudden sun;
 The choral heaven woke; the aethyr flooded
 All space with joy that you and I were one.
But in the dark and splendid dens of death
 Arose an echo of that jewelled song:
 There swept a savour of polluted breath
 From the lost souls, the unsubstantial throng
That tasted once a shadow of our glory
 And turn them in the evil house to adore
 The godhead of our sin, the tragic story
 We have set ourselves to write, the sombre score
Our daggers carve with poesy sublime
 Upon the roof tree of despair and crime\!

V

As we read Love and Death in either's eyes,
 We see the cool mild splendour of the dawn
 Damned by some tragic throw of murderous dice
 To slash like lightning over lea and lawn
Jagged and horrible across the curtain
 Of heaven, writing ruin, ruin—we see
 Our certain joy marred with a doubly certain
 Soul-shattering anguish.—Bah! To you and me
Such loathing, such despair are little things.
 We are afloat on the flood-tide of lust—
 A lust more spiritual than life, that stings
 Till death and hell dissolve i' the aftergust.
So? But the Gods avert their faces, bend
 Their holy brows, and see—no happy end.

VI

Thus shall men write upon our cenotaphs:
 "Traitor and lecher! murderess and whore!"
 The rat-faced god that lurks in heaven laughs;
 There is rejoicing on the immortal shore.
The angels deem us hurled from the above,
 Burnt out of bliss, blasted from sense and thought,
 Barred from the beauties of celestial love
 And branded with the annihilating Naught.
O! pallid triumph! empty victory\!
 When we sit smiling on the infernal thrones
 Starred with our utmost gems of infamy,
 Builded with tears, and cushioned with the groans
Of these the victims of our joys immense—
 Child! I aspire to that bad eminence\!

VII

Hell hath no queen! But, o thou red mouth curving
 In kisses that bring blood, shall I be alone?
 What of the accomplice of these deeds unswerving?
 Will not your dead hot hisses match mine own?
As here your ardours brand me bone and marrow
 Biting like fire and poison in my veins,
 Shall you not there still ply your nameless harrow.
 Mingle a cup from those our common pains
To intoxicate us with an extreme pleasure
 Keener than life's, more dolorous than death's
 Till these infernal blisses pass the measure
 Of heaven's imagined by the tremulous breaths
Of silly saints and silly sinners, swaying
 From scraps of blasphemy to scraps of praying?

VIII

You love me! trite and idle word to darken
 (With all its glow) the splendour of our sun\!
 No soul of heaven or hell may hearken
 The unbearable device that we have done.
Nor may Justine nor Borgia understand
 Nor Messalina nor Maria guess
 The infernal chorus swelling darkly grand
 That echoed us our everlasting 'Yes!'
Nor shall the Gods perceive to damn or praise
 The deed that shakes their essence into dust,
 Disrupts their dreams, divides their dreary days.
 Supreme, abominable, rides our lust
Armed in the panoply of brazen youth
 And strength, since, if we are Hell's, Hell's worm is Truth.

IX

We are still young enough to take delight
 In wickedness for wickedness' sole sake.
 Eve did not fall because she knew aright
 The fruit an apple, but the snake a snake.
Nor shall we sink among the foolish throng
 That seek an end, but rise among the few
 Who do the strong thing because they are strong
 And care not why they do, so that they do.
Therefore we wear our dread iniquity
 Even as an aureole, therefore we attain
 Measureless heights of nameless ecstasy,
 Measureless depths of unimagined pain
Mingled in one initiating kiss
 That those dissolve in the athanor of this.

X

We tread of earth in our divine disdain
 And crush its blood out into purple wine,
 Staining our feet with hot and amorous stain,
 The foam involving all the sensual shrine
Of love whose godhead dwells upon your mouth
 Wherein the kisses clustering overflow
 With brimming ardour of the new sin's growth
 Till round us all the poisonous blossoms blow,
And all the cruel things and hideous forms
 Of night awake and revel in our revel,
 While in us rage the devastating storms
 Whose dam is Luxury and their sire the devil...
It is well seen, however things intend,
 The Gods have given for this—no happy end.

XI

Crown me with poppy and hibiscus! crown
 These brows with nightshade, monkshood and vervain\!
 Let us anoint us with the unguents brown
 That waft our wizard bodies to the plain
Where in the circle of unholy stones
 The unconsecrated Sabbath is at height;
 Where the grim goat rattling his skulls and bones
 Makes music that dissolves the dusk of night
Into a ruddy fervour from the abyss
 Such as I see (when cunning can surprise)
 Our Argus foe and give us leave to kiss
 Within your deep, your damned, your darling eyes.
Ay! to the Sabbath where the crowned worm
 Exults, with twisted yard and slime-cold sperm.

XII

There gods descend; there devils rise. We dance,
 Dance to the madness of the waning moon,
 Write centuries of murder in a glace,
 Chiliads of rape in one unearthly tune.
There is the sacrament of sin unveiled
 And there the abortion of Demeter eaten,
 The potion of black Dione distilled,
 The measure of Pan by whirling women beaten.
These are but symbols, and our souls the truth;
 These sacraments, and we the gods of them;
 The sabbath incense curls to us to soothe
 Our spleen, engarlands us, a diadem
For that unutterable deed that hurled
 Us, flaming thunderbolts! against the world.

XIII

There needs not ask the obscure oracle
 Whereto these dire imaginations tend.
 We read this sigil in the dust of Hell:
 "The Gods have given for this no happy end."
What end should we desire, who grasp the gain
 We have despoiled from everlasting time,
 Who gather sunshine from the iciest rain
 And turn the dullest prose to rhythm and rime?
Think you we cannot warm our hands and laugh
 Even at the fire that scatheth adamant?
 Think you we shall not knead the utmost chaff
 Into a bread worth Heaven's high sacrament
And from the bitter dregs of Hell's own wine
 Distil a liquor utterly divine?

XIV

Behold! I have said. The destiny obscure
 Of this our deed obscure we shall not skry.
 We know "no happy end!"—but we endure,
 Abiding as the Pole Star in the sky.
You mix your life in mine—then soul in soul
 We shoot forth, meteors, travelling on and on
 Far beyond Space to some dark-glimmering goal
 Where never a sun or star hath risen or shone;
Where we shall be the evil light beyond time,
 Beyond space, beyond thought, supreme in deathless pang:
 Nor shall a sound invade that hall of crime.
 Only the champing of the insatiate fang
Of the undying worm our love, fast wed
 Unto—no happy end. Behold! I have said.

The Alchemist

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Love is sore wounded by the dragon shame,
 O maiden o' mine! its life in jets of blood
 Languidly ebbs. I see the gathering flame
 Aspire—expire. I see the evil flood
Of time roll even and steady over it,
 Bearing our God to the accurst ravines;
 Bearing our God to the abysmal pit
 Whence never a God may rise. The wolfish queens
Of earth have set their fates stern and sour
 Against us; we are bidden to cease—to cease\!
 Ha! how eternity laughs down their hour,
 Dragoons their malice with its dominant peace.
We are forbidden to love—as one who tries
 At noontide to forbid the sun to rise.

II

There is an alchemy to heal the hurt
 Done to our love by shame the dragon of ill
 With his allies the fear, that wars begirt
 With clouds, and that sad sceptic in the will
That sneaks within our citadel, that steals
 The keys and opens stealthily the gates
 When we are sleeping, when the dawn conceals
 Its earliest glimmer and our blood abates
Awhile its tide! O mystic maiden o' mine,
 Did I not warn you of the insulting foes?
 Blind worms that writhe for envy, pious swine
 That gnash their teeth to espy the gold and rose
Out flaming like the dawn when kiss for kiss
 Passed and for ever sealed our bale and bliss.

III

Behold! the elixir for the weeping wound\!
 Is it that wine that Avallaunius poured
 From the Red Cup when fair Titania swooned
 Before the wrath of her insulted lord?
Is it the purple essence that distilled
 From Jesu's side beneath the invoking spear?
 Or that pale vase that Proserpina filled
 From wells of her sad garden, cold and clear
And something overbitter and oversweet?
 Or in the rout of Dionysus did
 Some Bassarid prophesy in her holy heat
 On such a draught as I for you have hid
In this the Graal of mine enchaunted shrine
 To pour for you, o mystic maiden o' mine?

IV

Lola. The name is like the amorous call
 Of some bright-bosomed bird in bowers of blue.
 Tis like the great moon-crested waterfall
 With hammering heart. 'Tis like the rain of dew
That quires to the angel stars. 'Tis like a bell
 Rung by an holy anchoret to summon
 Out of the labyrinths of heaven and hell
 Some grave, majestic, and deep-breated woman
To bring her naked body shining, shining
 With flowers of heaven or flames of Phlegethon
 Into his hermit cell, her love entwining
 Into his life with spells that murmur on
Black words! For one thing be you sure the same
 My wine is as the music of your name\!

V

Maiden. Believe me, mystic maiden o' mine,
 That title shall assure the throne of heaven
 To you—the more so that your love divine
 That maidenhood to me hath freely given?
Nor have I touched the ark with hands unholy,
 Nor with unsaintly kisses soiled the shrine:
 Nepenthe, amaranth, vervain, myrrh and moly
 Are deathless blooms about our chaste design.
Not you resisting, but myself refraining,
 Gives us the eternal spring, the elixir rare,
 That mage and sage have sought, and uncomplaining
 Never attained. We found it early where
The Gods find children. Maiden o' mine, be sure
 My wine shall be as pure as you are pure\!

VI

Sweet. O my sweet, if all the heavenly portion
 Of nectar were in one blue ocean poured
 Their fine quintessence were a vile abortion
 Bitter and flat, foul, stagnant and abhorred
Should one compare it with the tiniest tithe
 Of one soft glance your eyes on me might shed,
 One gesture of your body limber and lithe,
 One smile—the sudden white, the abiding red\!
Then—should one slander you in idiot verse
 By speaking of the subtle seven-fold sweetness
 Your lips can answer me, all fate to amerce
 In one mad kiss in all its mad completeness?
O Gods and Muses! give me grace for this
 To match my wine for sweet with Lola's kiss.

VII

Mine. 'Tis impossible, but so it is.
 My mouth is Lola's and my Lola's mine
 When in the trance, the death we call a kiss,
 Earth is done down, and the immanent divine
Exists! Impossible! no mortal yet
 Suffered such bliss from the all-envious gods;
 Whence we may guess we are immortal, set
 From the beginning over the periods
Of ages, set on thrones of jasper and pearl,
 Wreathed with the lilies of Eternity,
 While on our brows the starry clusters curl
 Like flashes from the sunkissed jewelry,
Dew on the flowers our garlands. Ay! you are mine,
 And mine as you are shall I pour the wine.

VIII

Now I have told you all the ingredients
 That go to make the elixir for our shame.
 Already make the fumes their spired ascents;
 The bubbles burst in tiny jets of flame,
And you and I are half-intoxicated
 (I hid the heart of madness in my verse)
 Therewith, like Maenads ready to be mated
 Before the Lod of bassara and thyrse.
Yea! we are lifted up! Crested Kithairon
 Shakes his black mane of pines, and roars for prey.
 Heave all his bristling flanks of barbèd iron\!
 Flesh thy red hunger on the bleeding day,
O fangèd night! till from thy mother maw
 We wrench the lion child of wonder and awe\!

IX

This wine is sovereign against all complaints.
 This is the wine the great king-angels use
 To inspire the souls of sinners and of saints
 Unto the deeds that win the world or lose.
One drop of this raised Attis from the dead;
 One drop of this, and slain Osiris stirs;
 One drop of this; before young Horus fled
 Thine hosts, Typhon!—this wine is mine and hers
Ye Gods that gave it! not in trickling gouts,
 But from the very fountain whence 'tis drawn
 Gushing in crystal jets and ruby spouts
 From the authentic throne and shrine of dawn.
Drink it? Ay, so! and bathe therein—and swim
 Out to the wide world's everlasting rim\!

X

To drink one drop thereof is to be drunk.
 The firm feet stagger, and the world spins round;
 The fair speech stammers—nature's God hath sunk
 Into some trivial place of the profound.
But he who is drunk thereon is wholly sane,
 Being wholly mad; he moves with space-wide wings
 Sees not a world—engulphed in the inane\!
 Nor needs a voice for speech, because he sings.
What then of them who are most drunk together
 As you and I are, mystic maiden o' mine,
 Beyond Dionysus and his tedious tether,
 Beyond Kithairon and his topmost pine?
Why, even now I am drunk who scribble amiss
 These lines, not thinking—save of your last kiss\!

XI

So Lola! Lola! Lola! Lola! peals,
 And Lola! Lola! Lola! echoes back,
 Till Lola! Lola! Lola! Lola! reels
 The world in a dance of woven white and black
Shimmering with clear gold greys as hell resounds
 With Lola! Lola! Lola! and heaven responds
 With Lola! Lola! Lola! Lola!—swounds
 All light to clustered dazzling diamonds,
And Lola! Lola! Lola! Lola! rings
 Ever and again on these inchaunted ears,
 And Lola! Lola! Lola! Lola! swings
 My soul across to those inchaunted spheres
Where Lola is God and priest and wafer and wine—
 O Lola! Lola! mystic maiden o' mine\!

XII

I think the hurt is healed, for (by the law
 That forms our being) you must suffer as I,
 Hunger as I, rejoice as I, withdraw
 Into the same far transcendental sky
Of this initiated rapture. Hurt
 Of shame for me is past, beholding Gods
 Only a little part of me, and dirt
 Such as men fling and women paste, no odds.
Moreover, by the subtle and austere
 Vintage we drain, albeit we drain the less,
 There is no headache for the morning drear,
 No fluctuant in our tideless ecstasies—
Whereby, o maiden o' mine, the runic rime
 Tells me we have ree'd the riddle of old Time.

XIII

Never, o never shall I call you bride\!
 Never, o never shall I draw you down
 Unto my kisses by the dim bedside
 Bathing my body in the choral crown,
Your comet hair! Nor smooth our shimmering skins
 Each to the other and mount the sacred stair
 Even from the lesser to the greater sins
 Up to the throne where sits the royal and rare
Vision of Pan. O never shall I raise
 This oriflamme, and lead the hope forlorn
 Up to the ruining bloody breach, to daze
 Death's self with pangs too blissful to be borne.
No! dear my maid. A maiden as you be
 You may be all your lily life, for me.

XIV

Alas! the appointed term is sternly set
 Inviolable to this our colloquy.
 For though you be afar, my Lola, yet
 You have been with me, whispering to me.
I bow my head to write, and on the nape
 O' th' neck I feel you lips. I raise my head
 To dream—you mouth achieves its luscious rape—
 I fall back—you are on me—I am dead.
Could it be better? For I surely know
 That you will follow me adown the deep
 When I lay pen and paper by, and go
 Into the ardent avenues of sleep:—
There also we will drink the appeasing wine,
 Lola, my Lola, mystic maiden o' mine\!

The Hermit

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Lonely, o life, art thou when circumstance
 Occult or open keeps us twain apart\!
 Lamenting through the dreary day there dance
 Anaemic thoughts; the bruised and bloodless heart
Beats as if tired of life, as I am tired
 Who all these days have never seen your face,
 Nor touched the body that my soul desired,
 Nor have inhaled the perfume of the place
That you make sweet—black dogs of doubt and fear
 Howl at my heels while care plies whip and spur,
 Driving me down to the dull damned dead sphere
 Where is no sight or sounds or scent of Her
Our Lady Dian, but where hag and witch
 Hecat bestrides her broom—the bestial bitch\!

II

Like to a country in the interdict
 Whose folk lack all the grace of eucharist,
 My heart is; all the pangs its foes inflict
 Are naught to this unutterable mist
Of absense. Where's the daily sacrament,
 The glad devouring of your body and blood,
 Sweet soul of Christ, my Lola? I am rent
 Even as the demons from the face of God
When they would peer into beatitude.
 I am barred from the incalculable bliss,
 The unutterable chrism, the soul's food,
 Of you, your gaze, your word, your touch, your kiss
O Gods, Fates, Fiends—whoever plays the Pope\!
 Lift up your curse—leave me not without hope\!

III

My soul is like the savage upland plains
 Of utmost wretchedness in Tartary.
 No strength of sun, no fertilizing rains\!
 Only a bitter wind, intense and dry,
Cuts over them. Hardly the memory stands
 Of one who travels there; his pain forgets
 The golden bliss of all those other lands
 Where he was happy. So the blizzard frets
Its sterile death across my soul, and chills
 All hope of life even from the rare sad seeds
 It blows from sunnier values and happier hills,
 Though at the best they be but worthless weeds.
I stand—I scan the infinite horizon
 Of hopeless hope—yet I must travel on.

IV

When for an hour we met (to call it meeting
 Barred by the bleak ice of society
 From even the lover's glance, the lover's greeting.
 The intonation that means ecstasy!)
One ray of saddest gladness lit the dusk:
 This—that I saw you pale and suffering,
 A goddess armed with myrrh instead of musk,
 With lips too cold to pray, too dry to sing.
For by that sigh I knew the adorable
 Truth, that you wept in secret over me.
 Your silence was the dumb despair of hell;
 Who read it right read love. Strange cruelty,
That who would die for you, sweet murderess,
 Should find his comfort in your bitterness\!

V

For there you sat, you smiled, you chatted on,
 Myself alone perceiving the keen cold
 Sword at your heart, the speechless malison
 That trembled on your tongue, the while it trolled
Its senseless clamour of necessary wit,
 And woke the senseless necessary laughter,
 The senseless necessary reply to it,
 The long sad silly commonplace thereafter.
Suppose we had risen, as quick as thought, and stood
 And caught and kissed—what could the storm have done
 Worse than this sickening fog of solitude?
 Who can do worse than take away the sun?
They better had take care, I think. One day
 We shall go mad, and take ourselves away.

VI

Yet we may hope; for this, and not from fear,
 We kept our counsel; we may hope anon
 To turn the corner of the evil year
 And find a brave new springtide coming on.
Meanwhile by stealth I may invoke your shade
 And clasp you to me, though it be a dream
 Or little more, a vision from the Maid
 That rules by Phlegethon's sepulchral stream.
Nay! it is more: by magic art compel
 (My soul!) my maiden's body to appear
 Visible, tangible, enjoyable
 Even to the senses of the amorous seer,
Whose demon ministers through the gulphs and glooms
 Convey his mistress on their meteor plumes.

VII

More, I will visit you, forlorn who lie
 Crying for lack of me; your very flesh
 Shall tingle with the touch of me as I
 Wrap you about with the ensorcelled mesh
Of my fine body of fire: oh! you shall feel
 My kisses on your mouth like living coals,
 And piercing like an arrow of barbèd steel
 The arcane caress that shall unite our souls.
Till, when I see you next, I shall have doubt
 Whether your pallor be from love distressed
 Or from the exhaustion of the age-long bout
 Of love you had of me upon your breast
Held hard all night, with mouths that never ceased
 To engorge love's single sacramental feast.

VIII

One writes, and all is easy. Drop the pen,
 And Paradise is blotted out! The earth,
 Fair as it seemed, becomes a hideous den,
 And all life's promises of little worth.
Like to a mother whose one child is dead
 I wander, aching for the sight, the sound,
 The touch—familiar, now inhibited.
 The child is under ground—is under ground—
The child is under ground—who comforts her?
 The bastard fool her priest? The useless clod
 Her husband? The accursed murderer
 Her God?—if so be that she hath a God.
Foul curses from my life's envenomed flood
 Break in a vomit of black foam and blood.

IX

As one entranced by dint of cannabis,
 Whose sense of time is changed past recognition,
 Whether he suffer woe or taste of bliss,
 He loses both his reason and volition.
He says one word—what countless ages pass\!
 He walks across the room—a voyage as far
 As the astronomer's who turns his glass
 On faintest star-webs past the farthest star
And travels thither in the spirit. So
 It seems impossible to me that ever
 The sands of our ill luck should run so low
 That splendidly success should match endeavour;
Yet it must be, and very soon must be:
 For I believe in you, and you in me.

X

To-morrow is the day when Christ our Lord
 Rose from the dead; therefore, the shops are shut.
 Men may get drunk, or syphilized, or bored,
 Robbed, murdered, or regenerated—but\!
But they must not get letters, be amused,
 Or do a thing they want to do till Monday;
 Whence comes the universally-diffused
 And steady popularity of Sunday.
And yet I grumble! any other day
 I might receive a message from my Lola:
 "The siege is raised. Meet me as usual!" Nay\!
 For me the sofa and Verlaine or Zola,
Till Christ's affair is over, and the town
 Runs a young resurrection of its own.

XI

Were you a shop-girl and myself a clerk,
 Things might be better—we could surely meet
 With due umbrellas in the dripping Park
 And decorously spoon upon a seat.
This is the penalty one pays for rank
 And fortune! Ah, my Lola, I am dying
 And mad—or would God play me such a prank
 As to dictate such verse while you are crying?
Let me too weep, weep on! weep out my soul,
 Weep till the world of sense was wept away
 And, dead, I reached you at the glimmering goal
 Whither you had outrun me! Weep, I say,
Weep! It is better. Thus one earns a chrism—
 Who ever gained one by cheap cynicism?

XII

Wherefore I duly will invoke the God
 Of Tears that he may mingle yours and mine,
 Water therewith Life's unresponsive sod,
 And raise therefrom some sickly growth of vine
Whose grape shall yield a bitter draught of woe
 Fit for the assuaging of a deadlier thirst
 Than Attis knew or Abelard: even so
 I suffer; than some lovely nun accurst
Who beats her breast upon the convent bars,
 Even so you suffer: let its draught restore
 All lovers (that invoke the sad cold stars)
 Unto good luck: then you and I once more
(Though still we were forbidden word and kiss)
 Might find a certain happiness in this.

XIII

For truth it is, my maiden, we have had
 Already more than our fair share of pleasure.
 The good god Dionysus ivy-clad
 Hath poured us out a draught of brimming measure.
Let us then rather give the lustiest praise
 Our throats can sound than pray for further favour;
 Even though our sorrow, eating up our days,
 Devour us also. Gods enjoy the savour
Of Man's thanksgiving; from their holy place
 Beholding mortals, they are wroth to see
 Tears; they rejoice to see a proud glad face
 Master of itself and of eternity.
Let us, reflecting on how dear we love,
 Shew laughter and courage to the gods above\!

XIV

Now then the fickle song hath changed and shifted
 Round from the dirge to the primordial paean.
 Lola! my Lola! let our voices lifted
 Proclaim to all the Masters of the Aeon:
We love each other! let them meditate
 Awhile on that glad cry, and you will see
 How they consult, and smile, and hint to fate
 That none can mar so holy a destiny.
We love each other! loud and glad; let heaven
 And all the gods be deafened! Sing, O sing\!
 We love each other! through the storm-cloud riven
 Let the wild anthem of our triumph ring\!
Hark! the glad chorus as we drag the stars
 In chains behind our mad colossal cars\!

The Thaumaturge

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Then the Lord answered me out of the wind,
 Out of the whirlwind did He answer me;
 Gird up thy loins now like a man, and find
 If thou canst answer like a man to Me\!
Who art thou darkening counsel by thy word,
 And in thine ignorance accusing Them
 Who, ere thy prayer was formulated, heard
 And crowned it with its passion's diadem?
Who is the Son of Man, that We should mind him?
 Or visit the vain virgin of his pleasance?
 Yet ever as he went We stood behind him
 And compassed her with Our continual presence?
From the black whirlwind the most high God sayeth:
 Why did ye doubt, o ye of little faith?

II

I answer Thee out of the utmost dust.
 I am a worm, I abase myself, I cry
 Against myself that I am found unjust
 More than all they that dwell beneath the sky.
I do repent, I do lament, o Thou
 Who hast watched over us and cared for us,
 Beating i' the dust this consecrated brow,
 And answer Thee in broken murmur thus,
That I am altogether base and vile,
 That Thou art altogether good and great,
 That Thou hast given the guerdon grace for guile
 Even while I lifted up myself to Fate
And cursed Thee. And from me who scorned to pray
 Thou hast rolled the sad sepulchral stone away.

III

On this wise: that by uttermost good Forune
 I met you walking out in London city,
 Even when from Heaven I did not dare importune
 Hardly to pass your house! The Gods took pity
They whirled us in a chariot of fire
 About the highest heavens for many an age\!
 So Regent's Park may seem to hot desire;
 So the archangel gets a cabman's wage;
So all the aeons that pass still leave one time
 To take one's lunch at the appointed hour—
 This is the difference between prose and rime
 And this the great gulf fixed for leaf and flower.
The British public grunts and growls and grovels,
 Swilling its hogwash of neurotic novels.

IV

We knew enough to wake to choral rapture
 All answering Nature: I will swear the sun
 Came out; you saw the moulting trees recapture
 Their plumage, and the green destroy the dun.
Nothing could jar; the British workman took
 A kindly interest in our kind caresses;
 The loafing nursemaid and the musing cook
 Agreed with us entirely. Love impresses
Its seal upon the world; is skilled to wake
 The sympathy of everything that lives.
 Kindliness flows, not venom, from the snake;
 The trodden worm dies duly—but forgives.
The cabman asked four shillings for the job,
 And almost boggled at my glad ten bob\!

V

Oh! it was rapture and madness once again
 To turn our tears to kisses brimming over
 The mouths that never were too wide and fain
 For lover to hold intercourse with lover.
Ah! we were owls of dusk to doubt the light,
 Bats to mistrust the Wolf's tail's holy warning;
 "Sorrow endureth maybe for a night,
 But joy most surely cometh in the morning".
Joy, ay! what joy poured straight from the high treasure,
 The inexhaustible treasure of delight
 The gods have poured us, pouring overmeasure
 Because we love with all our life and might.
Believe me, it is better than all prayers
 To show the gods our love surpasses theirs\!

VI

Nay, even thus you could not credit Fate,
 Even in my arms close cuddled as you lay
 With hard-shut eyes and lips inebriate
 With their own kisses all this happy day.
Nay, but blaspheming you put hope aside,
 Bade me forget you, swore yourself a liar,
 Smiled through the words because you knew you lied,
 Knew that—what waters can put out our fire?
So we amused ourselves with cunning brisk
 Careful arrangements to forget each other.
 You cut that love-curl from your neck at risk
 Of comment—at the slightest—from your mother.
You gave it me—God forget me, dear girl,
 When I forget to treasure up that curl\!

VII

Your loveliness should help me to forget you;
 Your murmurous "I love you" like soft bees
 Humming should help; although my kisses fret you,
 They are intended but to give you ease,
And help you to forget me; then, the fixed
 Ardent intentness of my cat-green eyes
 Flecked with red fire is like a potion mixed
 Straight out of Lethe, or divination lies.
If there be truth in augury, your lips
 Fastened to mine should be a certain spell
 To put your memory of me in eclipse:—
 In short, if all be true that sages tell,
Two days of absence with roast beef and beer
 Will cure me of you perfectly, my dear\!

VIII

Why did you play with such ungracious folly?
 Because our passion is too bitter-sweet?
 Because the acute and maddening melancholy
 Is stronger than the rapture when we meet?
Because you weep beyond your own control
 Like to one wounded bleeding inwardly?
 Because you are not the mistress of your soul
 Mighty enough to master fate and me?
It cuts me to the heart to see the brine
 Not falling from your bad bewitching eyes,
 To feel you are weeping in the central shrine
 Whose woes the peristyle may not surprise.
I want to treat you as a lover rather;
 You make me lecture to you like a father\!

IX

Write in your heart, dear maid, that Hitherto
 The Lord hath helped us. Give Him duly praise
 (As I have given Him for making you).
 Pray not, ask not for wealth and length of days
Or even for wisdom, lest one day you find
 That you are saddened with some thousand grooms
 (You bear the case of Solomon in mind!)
 All in frock-coats and helmeted (with plumes)
—A scarcely pleasant prospect! Just give thanks
 O Lord, for what we have received, Amen\!
 And then if Jordan overflows his banks,
 Our vines increase, and one seed turns to ten,
Keep on thanksgiving! Even if things go wrong,
 Howls are less pleasant to the ear than song.

X

Keep on thanksgiving! We are tenfold blest
 Beyond others, simply having found each other.
 Were we to part for ever, breast from breast,
 Now, even now, there would not be another
In all the earth that should not envy aright
 With plenty cause our short-lived happiness.
 No life can hold one half-an-hour's delight
 Such as we had—this morning! Why then, bless,
Bless all that lives and moves and hath its being\!
 Bless all the Gods, without omitting one\!
 Bless all the company of heaven, agreeing
 To veil their fires to our stupendous sun\!
Bless all the lesser glories that excite
 In the great gladness of our mother light\!

XI

How purely unexpected was the chance\!
 When things looked blackest, on a sudden, the sun\!
 Chance is another word for ignorance;
 We do not know how all these things are done.
But what has happened once may happen again,
 And "Hitherto the Lord hath helped us", dear\!
 "History repeats itself"—which makes it plain
 That "Evermore the Lord will help us." Fear
And sorrow are folly; you must sleep o' nights
 (Try reading me!) and I can promise you
 You will awake to more divine delights
 Than ever in the world you guessed or knew.
Stick to it! One fine day you'll find on waking
 Me in your arms, and—oh! your body aching\!

XII

This is an effort of prophetic skill
 Not passing range of human calculation.
 A woman gets exactly what she will
 If she keeps willing it sans divagation.
To have me secretly and altogether
 Yours is your will—unless your kisses lied.
 Sooner or later we shall slip the tether
 And all the world before us deep and wide
Gape like the abyss, through which we fall to find
 Strange equilibrium without support,
 Strange rapture without sense, and void of mind
 Strange ecstasies that mock the name of thought.
Sooner or later, Lola! Circumstance
 Bows before those who never miss a chance.

XIII

This is enough to make a donkey laugh\!
 I talk like a Dutch uncle; and you listen
 Like a man reading his own epitaph.
 But, really! Truly! How our glad eyes glisten\!
How our hearts romp! Whatever we may say,
 Have never a doubt, Lord, that it's all thanksgiving\!
 If Thou dost thus for people every day,
 How very easy Thou must make a living\!
We would be like Thee! if we had the power
 We would fill all folk with supernal blisses,
 Breed life's sweet briar to the full June flower
 And on their praises feed our proper kisses.
For as you said "However kind the gods are,
 We could be kinder yet I think the odds are".

XVI

Let me take leave of you as heretofore
 With solemn kiss and sacred reverence\!
 I love you better and I love you more
 Daily, and whether you are hither or hence,
I adore you as I adore the holy ones
 That do abide exalted in their shrine
 Starry beyond mere splendour of stars and suns.
 Drunken beyond mere Dionysian wine.
Thus do I hold you; thus I pray you hold
 Me as a secret and a blessed chrism
 That you have gained to adorn your house of gold
 By some strange silent sacred exorcism.
You have said 'I love you'—sacraments are true—
 I exchange the salutation. I love you

The Black Mass

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Lord! on love's altar lies the sacrament.
 O willing victim, eager to be slain,
 Lusting to feel the knife, the life-veil rent,
 Assumption energized by death! O fain
To feel the murderous ardour of the priest
 Clutch at his throat, theurgic frenzy fly
 About the initiates of the Paschal feast
 And know it centred in the dim dead I
Loosed by the pang—even thus you know it is,
 Even thus, when I invoke your harsh caress,
 Put up my mouth to you immortal kiss,
 Confess you for my lady and murderess—
In mine own life-blood I exult to float
 Even as your white fangs fasten in my throat.

II

You stand away—to let your long lash curl
 About this aching body, fiery rings
 Of torture, o my hot enamoured girl
 Whose passion rides me like a steed and stings.
Like to a wounded snake infuriated
 With pain, you drive your reeking kisses home
 Into my flesh, their poisonous frenzy mated
 With this delirious anguish, bitter foam
Of storm on some innavigable sea.
 Whip, whip me till I burn! Whip on! Whip on\!
 Is it not madness that you wake in me?
 Is not this curse the devil's orison?
Ah, devil! devil! when you grip me and glare
 Into mine eyes, and answer all the prayer\!

III

A virgin with the lusts of Messaline,
 A goat-soul in the body of a saint,
 You writhe on me with cruel and epicene
 Phrenzy and agony of acute restraint.
You ache—you burn—you dizzy me with blows—
 You call me coward and eunuch, who say No.
 Volcanic child! upon your masking snows
 I will not raise my rod, that forth may flow
Torrents of blazing lava, that shall hiss
 And roar, and ruin all the glad green world.
 I like the attack of your seducing kiss,
 The lashes of you love about me curled,
Better than slack delight and murmuring sigh—
 Flowers by the road to sad satiety.

IV

Spit in my face! I love you. Clench your fists
 And beat me! Still, I love you. Let your eyes
 Like fiery opals or mad amethysts
 Curse me! I love you. Let your anger rise
And with your teeth tear bleeding bits of flesh
 Out of my body—kill me if you can\!
 I love you. I will have you fair and fresh,
 A maenad maiden maddening for a man.
Ay! you shall weary in the erotic craving\!
 I'll have you panting—aching to the marrow—
 Exhausted, but a maiden (Lesbia raving:
 "Catullus brings a song and not a sparrow")
Famished with love, fed full with love, your soul
 Still on the threshold of the unenvied goal.

V

The goal of love is gotten not of these
 White-blooded fools that haste and marry and tire.
 They grasp and break their bubble ecstasies;
 We know desire the secret of desire.
We have the wisdom of the saints of old
 Who know that what divinely is begun
 Glows from dawn's grey to noon's deliberate gold
 Darkens to crimson—and day's race is run.
For us the glamour of the dawn suborning,
 We escape the enervating heat of noon:
 We hear Astarte for Adonis mourning,
 And close our lover's calendar at June.
Ah, Lola! but we suffer. Hell's own worm
 Aches less than this, and hath an earlier term.

VI

You grind your tiny shoes into my face;
 You roll upon the furs before the fire,
 Smiting and cursing in the devil's race
 Whose goal and prize is Unassuaged Desire.
You rub your naked body against mine:
 You madden me by blows and bites and kisses;
 You make me drunken with your stormy wine;
 We swoon, we roll into unguessed abysses
Of torture and of bliss; we wake and yearn,
 Doing violence on ourselves—anon we are slain,
 Slain and reborn again to ache and burn:
 Aeon on aeon thunders through our brain.
—At last you see, my maiden? Kiss me! Kiss\!
 There is no end—happy or not—to this\!

VII

There is a respite—we must part anon.
 Short are the hours of sweetness: it is well.
 Could such a bout of murder carry on
 We should drink poison and awake in hell;
Or being but mortal, or nearly mortal, yield
 Exhausted spirit to the clamant flesh;
 The book of common love should be unsealed,
 And we be caught within the common mesh
That catches common folk. O God! bite hard\!
 Smite down rebellious flesh with hideous pain\!
 Bite hard! Smite hard! By bruises scarred and marred
 Love this exultant face! Again! Again\!
O Lola! Lola! Lola! Kiss me, Kiss\!
 Nay—nay! Kiss not! I cannot bear the bliss.

VIII

You are a devil gloating on the pain
 You suffer and I suffer; you laugh shrill
 Over the pangs of those pale fools, the twain
 Whom we deceive, whom we shall surely kill
Whispering a word of this. Ah! joy it is
 That false to faith is all the honied pressing;
 A traitor triumphs in each stolen kiss,
 Caligula and Cressida caressing.
You love yourself for stealing me away
 From the proud lovely wife; you love me more
 That in my arms a prostitute you lay,
 And to your troth-plight lover played the whore
When mouth to mouth we clung, and breath for breath
 Exchanged the royal accolade of death.

IX

I love you for your cruelty to them;
 I love you for your cruelty to me;
 I see their blood glittering a diadem
 Upon your dazzling brows; my blood I see
Sucked deep into your body, curling round
 Like fire in every artery and vein
 Massed in your heart, colossal and profound.
 I am mad for you to brand me with the stain
Of your own vice. Our souls, a murdering crew
 Of itching Mullahs, wallow, dervish-drunk.
 Love surges at the pang! Our poisonous dew
 Of sweat and kisses blinds us. A mad monk
Kissing fanatically the cross that had
 Devoured his vitals is not half as mad\!

X

Ay! rub yourself, you big lascivious cat,
 On the electric soft, the wanton fur\!
 Call upon Hera! You've a furious gnat
 Worth any gadfly ever sent from her\!
Call upon Aphrodite! she will send
 No sparrows from her prudish Paphian home\!
 Call upon Artemis! She will not bend
 To lift you from your seas of bitter foam\!
Nay! wrap yourself and rub yourself in silk\!
 Drink of my blood, engorge my fruitless sperm\!
 For you were suckled on the poisonous milk
 That betrays virgins to the deathless worm.
Are we not glad thereof? Kiss, Lola, kiss,
 Comrade of mine in the uttermost abyss\!

XI

Follow Iacchus from the Indian vales\!
 Set him with song upon the milk-white ass\!
 Follow Iacchus while the sunset pales\!
 Revel it on the flower-enamelled grass
While the moon lasts; then plunge in trackless woods\!
 Slay beasts unheard-of and blaspheming kings\!
 Mingle in madness with strange sisterhoods\!
 Dare black Aornos with Daedalian wings\!
All words! words! there's a hunger to express
 The infinite pangs, the infinite mighty blisses
 Stored in the house of rapture and distress
 Whose key is one of our blood-tainted kisses
Whose fume arises from the accursed sod
 Where we lie burning and blaspheming God.

XII

So in this agony of enforcèd silence
 The sober song breaks to a phrenzied scream;
 The shattering brain admits the mad god's violence,
 And wild things course as in an evil dream:
Devils and dancers, druid rites and dread,
 Horrible symbols scarred across the sky,
 Invisible terrors of the quick and dead,
 Impossible phantoms in mad revelry
Conjoined in spinthriae of bestial form,
 Human-faced toads, and serpent-headed women,
 All lashed and slashed by the all-wandering storm
 Caricature of all things holy and human—
—Such are the discords that absolve the strain
 As this wild threnody dissolves the brain.

XIII

Forgive me, o my holy and happy maid,
 Lola, sweet Lola, for the imagination
 Of all things monstrous that your soul dismayed
 Reads on the palimpset of my elation.
Simple and sweet and chaste our love is ever,
 And these its wild and mystic characters
 That rage and storm in impotent endeavour
 To unveil our glory to our worshippers.
Lola, dear Lola, mystic maiden o' mine,
 Let us not mingle with the ribald rout
 That throng our temple. Close, Palladian shrine,
 With our reverberate glory rayed about\!
Abide within—with me! Let silence sever
 This velvet 'now' from that unclothed 'for ever'\!

XIV

Though I adorn my thought with angel tresses
 Or pluck its pallium from the demon-kings,
 My spirit rests at ease in your caresses,
 And cares not for the song, so that it sings.
Life is but one caress, one song of gladness,
 One infinite pulse of love in tune with you;
 One infinite pulse, upsoaring into madness,
 Down sinking to content. O far and few
The stars that follow our lofty pilgrimage
 Into the abyss of silence and delight
 Beyond the glamour of the world, the age,
 The illusions of the light and of the night.
Wherefore accept these meteor flames that dance
 Pale coruscations to our brilliance\!

The Adept

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Even as the holy Ra that travelleth
 Within his bark upon the firmament,
 Looking with fire-keen eyes on life and death
 In simple state and cardinal content;
Even as the holy hawk that towers sublime
 Into the great abyss, with icy gaze
 Fronting the calm immensities of time
 And making space to shudder; so I praise
With infinite contempt the joyous world
 That I have figured in this brain of mine.
 The sails of this life's argosy are furled;
 The anchor drops in those abodes divine.
Master of self and God, freewill and Fate.
 I am alone—at last—to meditate.

II

Wrapped in the wool of wizardry I sit;
 Mantled in mystery; the little things
 That I have made through weariness of wit,
 Stars, cells, and whorls, all wonder in their wings\!
These Gods and men, these laws, these hieryglyphs
 And sigils of my fancy seem to spire
 In worship up mine everlasting cliffs
 I built between my will and my desire.
They reach me not; I made a monstrous crowd,
 Innumerable monuments of thought,
 But none is equal; this high head is bowed
 In vain to the wise God it would have wrought,
Had not—Who sitteth on the Holy Throne
 Thereby must make himself to be alone.

III

See! to be God is to be lost to God.
 That which I cling to is my proper essence;
 Nor is there aught at any period
 That may endure the horror of my presence.
I conjure up dim gods; how frail and thin\!
 How fast they slip from this appalling level\!
 This is the wage of the fellatrix Sin
 Drunk on the icy death-sperm of the Devil.
I were a maniac did I contemplate
 The outward glory and the inward terror,
 Sick with the hideous light myself create
 From the dark certainty of gloom and error.
For I am that I am—behold! this 'I'
 Hath nothing constant it may measure by.

IV

Should I take pleasure in the fond perfume
 That curls about my altars? in the throats
 That chant my glory in the decent gloom
 Of lofty ministers? Shall the blood of goats
And bulls and men send up a fragrant steam
 To me, who am? Shall shriek of pythoness
 Or wail of augur move this dreadful dream
 To some less melancholy consciousness?
I have created men, who made them gods
 Of their own excrements, and worshipped them.
 I cannot match these calculating clods
 Who twist themselves a faecal diadem
From all the thorny thought that plague them most;
 Break wind, and call upon the Holy Ghost.

V

Yet I abide; for who is Pan is all.
 He hath no refuge in deceitful death.
 What soul is immanent may never fall;
 What soul is Breath can never fail of breath.
The pity and the terror and the yearning
 Of this my silence and my solitude
 Are broken by the blazing and the burning
 Of this dread majesty, this million-hued
Brilliance that coruscates its jetted fire
 Into the infinite aether; this austere
 And noble countenance set fast in dire
 And royal wrath, this awful face of fear
Before whose glance the ashen world grows grey,
 Crashes, and chaos crumbles all away.

VI

As when the living eyes of man behold
 The embalmed seductions of a queen of Khem
 Wrapped with much spice and linen and red gold
 And guardian gods on every side of them;
Yet inasmuch as life is life, they shrink,
 Shrivel and waste to ashes as men gaze:
 So doth the world grow giddy at the brink
 Of these unfathomable eyes, that blaze
Swifter and deadlier than storms or snakes.
 Then—o what wonder, as I strain afar
 The basilisk flame!—what breathless wonder wakes
 That I behold unsinged a silver star\!
O joy! O terror! O!—O can it be
 There is a thing that is, apart from me?

VII

I travelled; so the star. We neared; we saw
 Each other, knew each other; in your face
 Mine equal self with majesty and awe
 Abode; and thus we stayed for a great space.
What was the manner of our countenance?
 I saw you seated, as a great lost God
 With blasphemy exulting in your glancce
 And horror at your lips; my soul was shod
With glory, and your body bathed in glory,
 So that from out the uttermost abyss
 The very darkeness churned itself to hoary
 And phosphor foam of agony and bliss.
The authentic seal of our majestic might
 Stamped on the light in light the light of light.

VIII

So presently, most solemnly and slowly,
 Our fingers touched and caught; our lips reached forth
 And with a conscious purpose smote their holy
 Lives into one, and loosed their common wrath.
Unto the ends of our dead universe
 Their frenzy rolled; henceforth no prince or power
 Should lift the sterile strength of that one curse
 Even to bring one thought to birth one hour.
For now we knew; "it is a lonely thing
 To sit supreme upon the single throne;"
 But being come thus far, goes glittering:
 "It is a lovely thing to be alone!"
Silence! Beware to speak the fatal word
 That might inweave our two-ply with a third\!

IX

Wherefore again in sexless sanctity
 The mighty lingam rears its stilled sublime;
 The mighty yoni spreads its chastity
 Against the assaulting gods of space and time.
Rather be Poedra than Semiramis\!
 I will deny you, though you doom to dare
 To abdicate, and risk the spirit kiss
 In the embraces of the wanton air.
Why should we cast our crowns to gods unborn?
 Why yield our bleeding garlands till the hour
 When to ourselves we seem a shame and scorn
 And seek some craft to span a statelier power?
Not for a while evoke that sombre spell\!
 The present still exceeds the possible.

X

That is his truth that seems to sink supine
 Into your bosom's bliss, the scented snare,
 Killed by your kisses shuddering in his spine
 And blinded in the bowers of your hair\!
This is his truth, who seems to writhe and sob
 Beneath the earthquake pangs of you caress,
 Whose heart burns out in one volcanic throb,
 Whose life is eaten up of nothingness.
This is his truth, and yours, that seem to be
 Mere beauteous bodies gripped in epicene
 And sterile passion, all unchastity
 In being chaste, all chaste in our obscene
And sexless mouthings, that repugnant roll
 Their bestial billows on the snow-pure soul.

XI

This is our truth, that only Nothing is,
 And Nothing is an universe of Bliss;
 That loves denote supernal ecstasies,
 And saintship lurks in the colossal kiss.
Loves are the letters of the holy word
 That contradicts the curse "Let Being be!"
 Since all things, even one thing, are absurd;
 And no thing is the utmost ecstasy.
Kisses induct the soft and solemn tune
 That Israfel shall blow on Doomisday—
 Your silky eyes are blue as that pale moon
 (For ere it dies it sickens into grey)
That witches see, whose eager violence
 Aborts the gods of cosmic permanence.

XII

The uninstructed and blaspheming man
 Looks on the world and sees it void and base.
 Let him endure its horror as he can\!
 There is no help for his unhappy case.
The love-taught magus, the hermaphrodite,
 Knows how to woo the Mother, and awake her;
 Beholding, in the very self-same sight,
 The self-illumined image of the Maker.
I love, and you are wise; our spirits dance
 A merry measure to the music moving
 In waves through that mirific brilliance.
 Will you first tire of wit, or I of loving?
Tire? O thou sea of love, thy ripples run
 Into themselves, to my serener sun\!

XIII

For you I built this faery dome of words
 And crowned it with the cross of my desire.
 I circled it with songs of blessed birds
 And cradled all in the celestial fire.
The stars enfold it; the eternal sun
 And moon give light; nor clouds nor rain intrude;
 Only the dews of Dionysus run
 In this intoxicating solitude.
I have begemmed its marble flame of spires
 With jewels from the bliss of God, and set
 Chryselephantine columns curled like fires
 Below each misty opal minaret.
Is there no window to the east? Behold
 The eyes of Love, your love, the essential gold\!

XIV

For me therein shall you erect a statue
 Even as you know me with the mystic eyes
 Hungrily, hungrily a-gazing at you,
 Afeast upon our strange sad ecstasies.
Make me the aching mouth parched-up with blisses
 The lips curled back, the breath desiring you,
 The whole face fragrant with your full free kisses,
 The soul thereof exhaling scented dew
Born in the utmost world where we in truth
 Abide like Bacchus with a Bassarid
 Drunk with our art, love, beauty, force and youth;
 But place that head upon a pyramid
Of snaky lightnings, lest—but that shall be
 Always a secret between you and me.

XV

Or, an you will, evoke me as the Sphinx
 With lion's claws, bull's breast, and eagle's wings\!
 You are my riddle, and the answer sinks
 Below the deep essential base of things,
Rises above the utmost brim of thought
 And bubbles over as impatient song.
 Yet "We are one" is all, and all is naught;
 And this one "one", and "all", and "naught"
The whole content of our imagining, [shall throng
 The great arcanum in the adytum hid
 From men, and though we varve or kiss or sing,
 The Sphinx is dumb, and blind the Pyramid.
—Now our affairs are ordered perfectly.
 Give me your mouth, your mouth, and let us die\!

The Vampire

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Let me away! Then is it not enough
 That you have won me to your wickedness?
 That we have touched the strange and sexless love
 Whose heart is death? That you and I express
The poison of a thousand evil flowers
 And drain that cup of bitterness, my Lola?
 That you have killed my safe and sunny hours—
 A Venus to seduce Savonarola\!
Why have you taken this most monstrous shape,
 Imperious malison and hate flung after?
 You clutch me like a gross lascivious ape,
 And like a gloating devil's rings the laughter.
O sweet my maid, bethink yourself awhile\!
 Recall the glad kiss and the gentle smile\!

II

Where are you? Who am I? O who am I?
 Why do I lie and let you? I was strong—
 I was so strong I might have bid you die
 With one swift arrow from my quiver, song.
Now you are over me; you hold me here;
 You grip my flesh till bleeding bruises start;
 You threaten me with—can I name the fear?
 I always knew you never had a heart.
God! who am I? My Lola, speak to me\!
 Tell me you love me; tell me—I am dazed
 With something terrible and strange I see
 Even in the mouth that kissed, the lips that praised.
You leer above me like a brooding fiend
 Waiting to leap upon a babe unweaned.

III

Kiss me at least! We always were good friends—
 Kiss me for old times' sake—Kiss me just once\!
 I know this ends—as every sweet thing ends\!
 But—say you are not angry! Ere you pounce,
Forgive me! You could make me glad to die,
 I think, if you would only kill me kindly.
 Just one swift razor-stroke—cut low!—and I
 Would pass the portal happily and blindly.
Yes! I would like to think the fountain sprang
 Straight from my throat and slaked your aching thirst,
 Shot to your hot red heart one red hot pang,
 Then left you cool and smiling as at first.
I give you freely my heart's agony.
 But oh! oh! speak to me! do speak to me\!

IV

God! do not wait then! kill me now; have done\!
 Why do you watch me mute and immobile,
 Sitting like death between me and the sun,
 A sphinx with eyes of jade and jaws of steel?
Let me rise up to kneel to you and pray\!
 I hate this hell of agony supine.
 You killed her yesterday; kill me to-day;
 Let me not hang like Christ! Now snap my spine\!
Surely you know the trick—when from your lips
 I see a think chill stream of stark black blood
 Trickling, the stream of hate that glows and grips
 My lesser life within its sickening flood.
Be pitiful, and end your cruelty\!
 Suck out the life of me, that I may die\!

V

O brooding vampire, why art thou arisen?
 Why art thou so unquiet in the tomb?
 Why has thy corpse burst brilliant out of prison?
 Whence get the lips their blood, the cheeks their bloom?
Is there no garlic I may wear against thee?
 No succor in the consecrated Host?
 Nay, if thou slay not it is thou restrainst thee.
 I am the virgin, thou the Holy Ghost.
There is no comfort nor defence nor peace
 From thee (and all thy malice) in the world:
 Thou sittest through the aching centuries
 Like the old serpent in his horror curled
Ready to strike, strike home—and yet not striking
 Till thou hast lipped the victim to thy liking\!

VI

Am I not beautiful? Your lithe mouth twitches
 As if already you were glutted on
 This fair firm flesh that fears you and yet itches
 —You know it—for some master malison.
Perhaps you mean to let me go? Ah sweet\!
 How seven times sweet if you will let me go—
 Oh! Oh! I want to worship at your feet.
 Why do you stab me with a smiling "No"?
Say "no" at least—to see you sitting there
 So dumb is madness—why then, let me go\!
 I will—and you sit quiet—did you dare?
 To everything the answer still is "No!"
You coward! Coward! Coward! let me rise!—
 I cannot bear the hunger in your eyes.

VII

You are afraid of me—I see it now.
 You know that if you loose me, never again
 Will I be such a fool. I wonder how
 I ever took this destiny of pain.
Loose me! You dare not. Take your eyes away\!
 You dare not. O you laugh! You trust your power
 There you are wrong—but had you turned to-day
 I would have murdered you within the hour.
Yes! you do well—you know the dreadful weight
 Pale silence sheds, not Atlas could uplift
 You know the spell to conquer love and hate,
 To win the world and win it at a gift.
You are afraid of that then—had you spoken
 You fear the spell upon me had been broken\!

VIII

Even that taunt has left you smiling still,
 And silent still—and that is ten times worse.
 Where is my will, my adamantine will?
 Curse God and die? I can nor die nor curse.
Ah, but I can. The agony extends—
 I am wrapt up all in an equal hell.
 There is a point at which emotion ends.
 I am come through to peace, though pain yet swell
Its paean in my every vein and nerve.
 Try me, o God, convulse me to the marrow\!
 I am its element; I shall not swerve.
 I am Apollo too; I loose one arrow
Swift enough, straight enough to conquer you.
 O Sphinx! Gaze on! I can be silent too.

IX

Now then the pressure and the pain increase,
 And ever nearer grows the exulting rose
 Your face; and like a Malay with his kriss
 That runs amok your passion gleams and grows.
It shakes me to the soul: by that you are stilled;
 You hold yourself together, like a man
 Stabbed to the heart, who, knowing he is killed,
 Lets his whole life out in his yataghan,
And strikes one masterstroke. So now you breathe
 Close on my face; you strip me of defence;
 You sing in obscure words whose crowns enwreathe
 My forehead with their viewless violence,
So that I lie, as at the appointed term,
 Awaiting the foul kisses of the worm.

X

You close on me; by God, you breed in me\!
 My flesh corrupt is tingling with the kiss
 Of myriads, like the innumerable sea
 In waves of life that feeds its boundless bliss
On the eroded earth. These are your thoughts,
 Your living thoughts that throng my stagnant veins\!
 Your jackals howl among the holy courts;
 Your monster brood of devils in my brains
Laughs; oh! they feast on my decaying blood;
 They gnaw the last sweet morsel from my bones.—
 As on the parched-up earth there flames the flood
 Of the monsoon, black dust and bareen stones
Leap into green, so I whose epitaph
 Your passion writes, awake to live—to laugh\!

XI

Even to the end of all must I resist.
 New deaths, new births, each minute bolling over.
 I can go on for ever, an you list—
 Now, now! O no! I will not. O my lover\!
Spare me! Enough! Take pity! Mutely moans
 Your mouth in little sobs and calls and cries
 And catches of the breath, whose bliss atones
 In once for all the long-drawn agonies.
Now that the pain swings over into pleasure,
 Now that the union which is death is done,
 The wine of bliss rolls out in brimming measure.
 The moon is dead—all glory to the Sun\!
Now, now! Oh no! Oh no! I penetrate—
 I pierce. Enough. God! God! how Thou art great\!

XII

Then closer, closer. No!—then stop—think well
 What is this wonder we awake. Now think
 We are cast down to the abyss of hell
 Or tremble upon heaven's dizzy brink—
Which? All's the same. Go on. No—what is this?
 Why dally? To the hilt! Ah mine, ah mine\!
 Kiss me—I cannot kiss you—kiss me! Kiss\!
 Oh! God! Oh God! Forgive me; I am thine.—
Horses and chariots that champ and clang\!
 The roar of blazing cressets that environ
 The form that fuses in the perfect pang.
 A blast of air thorough the molten iron—
One scream of light. Creating silence drops
 Into that silence when creation—stops.

XIII

So—é finita la commedia.
 "And if the King like not the comedy"
 (Twine in your hair the fallen gardenia!)
 "Why then, belike he likes it not, pardie!"
What will the "King"—the British Public—say
 When they perceive their sorrow was my fun,
 Their Hecuba my mocking Brinvilliers?
 I neither know nor care. What we have done
We have done. Admit, though, you are rare and rich\!
 This palely-wandering knight has found a flame
 Both merciless and beautiful, you witch\!
 You play the game, and frankly, as a game\!
This is the hour of prattle—tell me true\!
 I have never met another such. Have you?

XIV

Yet all the comedy was tragedy.
 I truly felt all that I farced to feel.
 Because the wheel revolves, forsooth, shall we
 Deny a top and bottom to the wheel?
I am the centre too, and stand apart.
 I am the All, who made the All, in All
 Who am, being Naught. I am the bloodbright Heart.
 Wreathed with the Snake, and chaos is their pall
Thou art as I; this mystery is ours.
 These blood-bought bastards of futility
 Can never know us, fair and free-born flowers.
 So they may say—they will—of you and me:
"These poets never know green cheese from chalk:
 "This is the sort of nonsense lovers talk."

The Initiation

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

I

Lola! now look me straight between the eyes.
 Our fate is come upon us. Tell me now
 Love still shall arbitrate our destinies,
 And joy inform the swart Plutonic brow.
Behold! the doom foreseen, the doom embraced,
 Fastens its fang; the gods of death and birth
 Make friends to slay us, Pilate interlaced
 With Herod in obscene and muderous mirth.
Lola! come close! confront them! Let us read
 The book once sealed, now open to our gaze\!
 Avenge our love and vindicate our breed
 With courage to the ending of the days.
Since fall we must, o arm ourselves aright,
 Fall fighting in the forefront of the fight\!

II

First: let us face the foemen, number them,
 Measure their arms! Who smiteth us? We wove
 In grove and garden many a diadem
 Dewy with all the purity of love.
The Hermes of the orchard lets the string
 Slip from his finger, and the arrow speeds
 Striking our love beneath the flamy wing
 So that the heart of heaven breaks and bleeds.
That poisoned shaft fed with corrupting germs
 Hath stricken us to earth: the wound corrodes,
 Breeding within us all its noisome worms,
 All the black larvae of the accurst abodes:—
The virgin of our reed-shrill ecstasies
 Raped by the stinking satyr of disease\!

III

I who have loved you—shall I love you now,
 Your teeth dropt out, your fair flesh fallen away,
 The Crown of Venus on you itching brow,
 The coppery flush, the leprous scurf of grey?
The god that rots the líving flesh of man
 Fills up your mouth—one ulcer—with his groans
 And all our blessings choke and turn to ban
 The beast that gnaws the marrow of our bones.
Caught in corrupt caresses of disease,
 Shall we dispute us with his fervour, fain
 To woo with sores your turbid arteries
 And kiss black ulcers in your spotted brain?
We married close, my Lola, with a kiss:—
 Now for the lifelong lover, Syphilis\!

IV

Yea! but we love. We win. The body's curse
 Is bitter, but he hath not won the whole.
 There's more than life in this brave universe.
 Death cannot touch the secret of the soul\!
Nor shall we shrink, although this further pang
 Strike through the liver with its fiery dart,
 The hope—the horrid hope—whose gleaming fang
 Now stirs, a serpent's, underneath your heart\!
For lo! not vainly we invoked the god
 That looseneth the girdle of a maid;
 Even now draws nigh the dreadful period
 That maketh all the mother-world afraid.
With rotten fruit your belly is grown big
 —Thanks to the bastard god that cursed the fig\!

V

Your swollen neck is grown a swollen breast
 Gushing with poisoned milk; your breath is caught
 In quick sharp gasps; you get nor sleep rest,
 The monster moving in you in his sport.
Surely a monster! some unnatural thing,
 Some Minotaur of shame, no egg of pride
 To hatch the miniature of love and spring
 In your own image, subtly glorified.
White swan you were! not Zeus but Cerberus
 Hath ravished you; you brood on harpy eggs—
 Sweet sister! is the wine too sour for us?
 We have drunk deep—nay! nay! but to the dregs\!
And all their bitterness is braver brew
 Than the dull syrup of the pious crew.

VI

Still we can laugh at burgesses and churls
 In our excess of agony and lust.
 We pity these poor prudes, insipid girls
 And tepid boys, these creatures of the dust.
We pity all these meal-mouthed montebanks
 That prate of Jesus, ethics, faith and reason,
 These jerry-built dyspeptics, stuccoed cranks,
 Their lives one dreary plain, one moist dull season
Like their grey land. O costive crapulence\!
 They ache and strain within the water-closet
 Of church and State, their shocked bleat of offence:
 "This poet's life was such a failure". Was it?
Fools! our worst boredom was a loftier thrill
 Than all you ever felt—or ever will.

VII

If we are weary, it is flesh that faints.
 We cannot bear such worlds of happiness.
 Even in this torture that consumes and taints,
 We writhe in bliss, one terrible caress
Of the great Gods of Hell. Ah! surely, dear,
 Our way is wise, transcending human woe:
 We are most happy and of great good cheer.
 What do we know? It matters not. We know.
This is enough, that we have slain the Sphinx,
 Worked out her wizardry, dissolved her doom;
 And though her wine be death to him that drinks
 We shall carouse for ever in the tomb.
We drank bull's blood; and all our pangs immense
 Are better than eupeptic innocence.

VIII

Ah! if flesh fails, may we not also fail?
 May not the vulture liars gather round
 Our death-beds, and drone out their dismal tale
 With drawl and whine, the Galilean sound
Of snuffle and twang? May not their stinking souls
 Interpret our last sighs as penitence
 When we close up the coruscating scrolls
 Of our life's joy, seal up the jar of sense
To broach the starry flagon—splendid spilth?
 These creeping cravens shall be circumvented;
 They shall not belch their flatulence and filth
 On us, or tell the world that we repented.
Come, as we strained it, let us break the tether
 In the last luxury—to die together\!

IX

Let Death steal softly through the gate of sleep
 On tiptoe! win way the maiden life
 On velvet pinions to his azure steep;
 At ease, at peace, to woo her for a wife\!
His white horse waiting quietly without
 Let him push gently the delicious door
 And take us. We have lived. How should we doubt
 Or fear? we have lived well. For ever more
We must be well. The cypress cannot daunt,
 Nor the acacia thrill; we are content
 To wander in the shadowy groves, to haunt
 The dark delight of our own element;
Or—could we send a messenger—to tell
 Our brothers of the happiness of Hell\!

X

Are not the poppy-fields one snowy flame?
 Come, let us wander hand in hand therein,
 Staining with joyout juice our lips of shame,
 Draining their bitter draught of sterile sin\!
Are not the eyes of sleep already dull,
 The lashes drooping over their desire?
 Are not the gods awaiting to annul
 With Lethe the last flicker of the fire?
Ay, let us kiss, my darling; let us twitch
 For the last time the flesh against the flesh,
 Before the coming of the lovely witch
 That shall excite our sleepy souls afresh,
Anointing us with subtle drugs and suave,
 Fit for the grave, for love beyond the grave\!

XI

For the last time, my Lola! Still the name
 Fills me with music, echoing afar
 Faint, like the rapture of some ghostly flame
 Rejoicing in some lone secreted star
Beyond the visible heaven. Come to me\!
 Come closer! Is not this as close as death?
 Are we not one to all eternity
 Jewelled with joy? Mix me your subtle breath
Into the words well-known and never worn,
 Into the kiss well-kissed and never tired,
 Into the love well-loved and not forlorn,
 The love beyond all that ever was desired?
Ay! all the cloudy must of life is strained
 To clearer liquor that our souls attained.

XII

How the yahoos will rage and rave about
 Our sloughs! "Appalling double suicide\!
 "'Orrible detiles". In the world without
 We never yet consented to abide.
What should we care, within this cave of bliss,
 This ocean of content, wherein we dive
 And play like dolphins, for the horrid hiss
 Of blow-flies? Nay, they never were alive\!
O the sweet sleep that fastens on these brows\!
 O the enchauntment of this dreamy god,
 My mystic sister, my mellific spouse,
 Tht shepherds us with his hermetic rod
Into the flowery folds of love and sleep
 Where we have strayed—O never yet so deep\!

XIII

Lola, dear Lola, how the stillness grows\!
 How drosy is the world, that folds her wings
 Over us, folding like a sunset rose
 Her crimson raptures to the night of things\!
How all the voices and the visions fail
 As we pass through into the silent hall
 Beyond the vapours and beyond the veil,
 Beyond the Nothing as beyond the All\!
Ah! then, our voice must also fail in this;
 Our symbols are but shadows in the sun;
 Love's self springs from the shadow of the kiss;
 Our bliss! O, that was hardly half begun\!
We fight the Fate as we have fought the foemen.
 The poison takes us.—Χαίρετε νικῶμεν.

XIV

Farewell! O passionate world of changeful hours\!
 Come, Lola, let us sleep! Elysian groves
 Await us and the beatific bowers
 Where Love is ours at last—as we were Love's.
Come, with our mouths still kissing, with our limbs
 Still twined, relax the ecstasy! pass by
 To the abyss of night where no star swims\!
 On to the end beyond the prophecy\!
Ah Lola mine! "No happy end is this"—
 I love you—ah! you love me—you love me\!
 For we have passed beyond imagined bliss
 Into the kingdom of reality,
Where we are crowned with flowers—yet closer creep\!
 Sleep, Lola, now! I love you—sleep—ah, sleep\!

Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE AUGUR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| I. 6.                   | They. — The Fates or Moirae.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| III. 11.                | The dog-faced god. — Anubis, the Threshold-Guardian of the 'Gods' of Egypt. Mantic means prophetic.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VI. 14.                 | Child. — The unhappy girl was at this time but 17 years old.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VIII. 5.                | Justine. — The virtuous but victimized heroine of the infamous novel of the Marquis de Sade.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XI. 6.                  | Sabbath. — Consult Payne Knight: 'Essays on the worship of Priapus', Eliphas Levi: 'Dogme et rituel de la haute Magie' and others.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIII. 12. 13.           | Sigil. — Sign-manual.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE ALCHEMIST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| I. 8.                   | Wolfish queens. — Thus these wicked wretches dare to speak of their kind and godly relations.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| II. 11.                 | Blind worms—pious swine. — The poor servants of God! Ah, well! we have our comfort in Him; like Our Blessed Lord, we can forgive. It is for our loving Lord to set His foot upon the necks of our enemies, and to cast them out into the blackness of darkness for ever.                                                                                                                                                   |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| V. 12. 13.              | This is quite unintelligible to me.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XI.                     | I think this is what is called Echolalia, a sure sign of 'degeneracy'; or, as I prefer to think, a wickedness which has gone, dreadful as it sounds to write, beyond the Infinite Mercy of God. "I will send them strong delusion."                                                                                                                                                                                        |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIII. 9.                | Oriflamme. — How obscene is all this symbolism!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE HERMIT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IV. 7.                  | Myrrh—musk. — The perfumes of Sorrow and of Lust. Many prostitutes scent themselves strongly with musk, the better to allure their unhappy victims.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VI. 8.                  | Maid. — Proserpine, or Hecate. I think the latter, as Proserpine became wife of Hades.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VII.                    | This disgusting sonnet seems to refer to the wicked magical practice of travelling by the astral double.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IX.                     | Cannabis. — Indian hemp, a drug producing maniacal intoxication.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| X. 12.                  | Verlaine! Zola! — These are the vampires that suck out the virtue from our young people, the foreign corrupters of our purer manners!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XII. 7.                 | Attis—Abelard. — 'Thirst' here clearly means unhallowed lust, since Attis and Abelard were both mutilated persons.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIV. 13. 14.            | What mad megalomania!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE THAUMATURGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| I. 1.                   | Horrible blasphemy of this adaptation of Job to their vile purposes!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IV. 14.                 | Ten bob. — Vulgarity must always go with wickedness. Christ is not only a saving but a refining influence.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| V. 6.                   | Wolf's tail. — The Zodiacal Light, seen before dawn.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIV.                    | I suppose that such a mixture of ribaldry, blasphemy, vulgarity, and obscenity, as this series of sonnets has never been known. But worse is to follow!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE BLACK MASS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XI. 6.                  | A reference to the Bacchae of Euripides.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE ADEPT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| I. 1.                   | Ra. — The 'Sun-God'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| I. 5.                   | Horus. — The hawk, also a 'Sun-God'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| II. 1.                  | Apollonius of Tyana, the notorious pseudo-Christ, used to cover himself in wool in order to meditate.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| III. 7.                 | Fellatrix. — Only a Latin dictionary can unveil the loathsome horror of this filthy word.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IV. q. sqq.             | — Impossible to comment on this shocking 'sin against the Holy Ghost' To compare the very Spirit or Breath of God to—Oh, Lord, how long?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VI. 11.                 | Basilisk. — a fabulous creature that slew all that it looked upon.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IX. 1.                  | Lingam. — The Hindu God (!) — the male organ of generation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 2.                      | Yoni — Its feminine equivalent. That the poor Hindus should worship these shameful things! And we? Oh how poor and inadequate is all our missionary effort! Let us send out more, and yet more, to our perishing brothers!                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5.                      | Phædra was repulsed by her son Hipolytus; Semiramis receved the willing embraces of her son Ninus.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XI. 1.                  | Only Nothing is. — There is much metaphysical nonsense culled from German Atheistic philosophy, in these poems. A wicked philosopher is far more dangerous than a mere voluptuary.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10.                     | Doomisday. — An affected archaism for the Day of Judgment. How can the writer dare to speak of this great day, on which he shall be damned for ever? "For he that believeth not is condemned already."                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XII. 6.                 | Mother. — Nature. How true would be these striking words, if only for "the love-taught magus, the hermaphrodite" with all its superstition, blasphemy, and obscenity, one were to write "The Christ-saved sinner, brought into the light".                                                                                                                                                                                 |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XV. 10.                 | The arcanum in the adytum. — More classical affectation for "the secret thing in the holy place".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE VAMPIRE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| I. 8.                   | Savonarola. — An ascetic Florentine doctor.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| V. 1-6.                 | For a good modern account of vampires and their habits, consult Mr Bram Stoker's Dracula.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IX. 3.                  | Kriss. — The Malayan dagger.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 4.                      | Runs amok. — Maddened by drink, these wretches run wildly through the streets, slaying all they meet until they themselves are slain. Only the gospel of Christ can save such.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 8.                      | Yataghan. — The Afghan sword.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XII. 12.                | The writer is evidently thinking of the "Bessemer converter".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIII. 1.                | "The comedy is finished".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 5-7.                    | A reference to Hamlet and the Players.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10. 11.                 | Reference to Keats' Belle Dame sans Merci.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIV. 10.                | Blood-bought bastards. — Christians! O Saviour! what didst Thou come to save?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 6.                      | Quoted from Arnold's Song Celestial.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 7. 8.                   | Quoted from a magical Coptic papyrus.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| THE INITIATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| III.                    | This shocking sonnet awakes pity and disgust in equal proportions. If even then they had only turned to the "Great Physician!" But no! "God hardened Pharaoh's heart".                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IV. 14.                 | Alas! no doubt that the reference is to our blessed Lord and Master, The barren fig-tree has been no doubt a stumbling-block to many weak souls. But the fig tree has here a deeper signification in its reference to certain loathsome forms of disease, and it is a symbol of lust. See Rosenbaum's "Plague of Lust"                                                                                                     |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| V. 1.                   | Swollen neck. — A superstition of the ancients was that the neck swelled on the bridal night, and virginity was tested by the proportion of the skull and the neck. See Beverland "Draped Virginity".                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VI.                     | Poor, poor deluded victims of Satan! If they only knew the holy joy of even the least of Jesu's lambs!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| VII. 13.                | Bull's blood. — Supposed to be a poison by the ancients. Thus Themistocles is said to have died.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| IX. 9.                  | Cypress. — Symbol of death.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| 10.                     | Acacia. — Symbol of resurrection.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| X. 1.                   | The poppy-fields. — They killed themselves with laudanum.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XII. 1.                 | Yahoos. — See Swift's Voyage to Laputa. It is feared that the mad Dean intended to satirize mankind, the race for which the Lord of Glory died!                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| XIII.                   | Rejoice, we conquer. It si really very extraordinary how Satan's blindness and fury possess them to the very end. Even as they died, maybe one fervent cry of repentence to the dear Saviour of all men would have been heard, and the gates of Paradise swung open as Satan, cheated of his prey, sank yelling into the Pit. But alas! there is no such word: nothing but a pagan Epicureanism even in the jaws of death. |                         |
+-------------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+

A Prayer

Merciful and loving Father, almighty God, grant unto us Thy humble servants and ministers a double portion of Thy Spirit that our eyes may be opened to the wickedness of them that love Thee not, that by Thy grace our ministrations may be used to bring them out of darkness into Light, by the virtue of our crucified Lord, risen and ascended, Thine only-begotten Son, in Whose name we ask this Thy blessing. For Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

The End

 

[]



Liber AL vel Legis sub figura CCXX as delivered by XCIII = 418 to DCLXVI

Publication in Class A

Chapter I

1. Had! The manifestation of Nuit.

2. The unveiling of the company of heaven.

3. Every man and every woman is a star.

4. Every number is infinite; there is no difference.

5. Help me, o warrior lord of Thebes, in my unveiling before the Children of men!

6. Be thou Hadit, my secret centre, my heart & my tongue!

7. Behold! it is revealed by Aiwass the minister of Hoor-paar-kraat.

8. The Khabs is in the Khu, not the Khu in the Khabs.

9. Worship then the Khabs, and behold my light shed over you!

10. Let my servants be few & secret: they shall rule the many & the known.

11. These are fools that men adore; both their Gods & their men are fools.

12. Come forth, o children, under the stars, & take your fill of love!

13. I am above you and in you. My ecstasy is in yours. My joy is to see your joy.

14. Above, the gemmèd azure is The naked splendour of Nuit; She bends in ecstasy to kiss The secret ardours of Hadit. The winged globe, the starry blue, Are mine, O Ankh-af-na-khonsu!

15. Now ye shall know that the chosen priest & apostle of infinite space is the prince-priest the Beast; and in his woman called the Scarlet Woman is all power given. They shall gather my children into their fold: they shall bring the glory of the stars into the hearts of men.

16. For he is ever a sun, and she a moon. But to him is the winged secret flame, and to her the stooping starlight.

17. But ye are not so chosen.

18. Burn upon their brows, o splendrous serpent!

19. O azure-lidded woman, bend upon them!

20. The key of the rituals is in the secret word which I have given unto him.

21. With the God & the Adorer I am nothing: they do not see me. They are as upon the earth; I am Heaven, and there is no other God than me, and my lord Hadit.

22. Now, therefore, I am known to ye by my name Nuit, and to him by a secret name which I will give him when at last he knoweth me. Since I am Infinite Space, and the Infinite Stars thereof, do ye also thus. Bind nothing! Let there be no difference made among you between any one thing & any other thing; for thereby there cometh hurt.

23. But whoso availeth in this, let him be the chief of all!

24. I am Nuit, and my word is six and fifty.

25. Divide, add, multiply, and understand.

26. Then saith the prophet and slave of the beauteous one: Who am I, and what shall be the sign? So she answered him, bending down, a lambent flame of blue, all-touching, all penetrant, her lovely hands upon the black earth, & her lithe body arched for love, and her soft feet not hurting the little flowers: Thou knowest! And the sign shall be my ecstasy, the consciousness of the continuity of existence, the omnipresence of my body.

27. Then the priest answered & said unto the Queen of Space, kissing her lovely brows, and the dew of her light bathing his whole body in a sweet-smelling perfume of sweat: O Nuit, continuous one of Heaven, let it be ever thus; that men speak not of Thee as One but as None; and let them speak not of thee at all, since thou art continuous!

28. None, breathed the light, faint & faery, of the stars, and two.

29. For I am divided for love's sake, for the chance of union.

30. This is the creation of the world, that the pain of division is as nothing, and the joy of dissolution all.

31. For these fools of men and their woes care not thou at all! They feel little; what is, is balanced by weak joys; but ye are my chosen ones.

32. Obey my prophet! follow out the ordeals of my knowledge! seek me only! Then the joys of my love will redeem ye from all pain. This is so: I swear it by the vault of my body; by my sacred heart and tongue; by all I can give, by all I desire of ye all.

33. Then the priest fell into a deep trance or swoon, & said unto the Queen of Heaven; Write unto us the ordeals; write unto us the rituals; write unto us the law!

34. But she said: the ordeals I write not: the rituals shall be half known and half concealed: the Law is for all.

35. This that thou writest is the threefold book of Law.

36. My scribe Ankh-af-na-khonsu, the priest of the princes, shall not in one letter change this book; but lest there be folly, he shall comment thereupon by the wisdom of Ra-Hoor-Khu-it.

37. Also the mantras and spells; the obeah and the wanga; the work of the wand and the work of the sword; these he shall learn and teach.

38. He must teach; but he may make severe the ordeals.

39. The word of the Law is θελημα.

40. Who calls us Thelemites will do no wrong, if he look but close into the word. For there are therein Three Grades, the Hermit, and the Lover, and the man of Earth. Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.

41. The word of Sin is Restriction. O man! refuse not thy wife, if she will! O lover, if thou wilt, depart! There is no bond that can unite the divided but love: all else is a curse. Accursed! Accursed be it to the aeons! Hell.

42. Let it be that state of manyhood bound and loathing. So with thy all; thou hast no right but to do thy will.

43. Do that, and no other shall say nay.

44. For pure will, unassuaged of purpose, delivered from the lust of result, is every way perfect.

45. The Perfect and the Perfect are one Perfect and not two; nay, are none!

46. Nothing is a secret key of this law. Sixty-one the Jews call it; I call it eight, eighty, four hundred & eighteen.

47. But they have the half: unite by thine art so that all disappear.

48. My prophet is a fool with his one, one, one; are not they the Ox, and none by the Book?

49. Abrogate are all rituals, all ordeals, all words and signs. Ra-Hoor-Khuit hath taken his seat in the East at the Equinox of the Gods; and let Asar be with Isa, who also are one. But they are not of me. Let Asar be the adorant, Isa the sufferer; Hoor in his secret name and splendour is the Lord initiating.

50. There is a word to say about the Hierophantic task. Behold! there are three ordeals in one, and it may be given in three ways. The gross must pass through fire; let the fine be tried in intellect, and the lofty chosen ones in the highest. Thus ye have star & star, system & system; let not one know well the other!

51. There are four gates to one palace; the floor of that palace is of silver and gold; lapis lazuli & jasper are there; and all rare scents; jasmine & rose, and the emblems of death. Let him enter in turn or at once the four gates; let him stand on the floor of the palace. Will he not sink? Amn. Ho! warrior, if thy servant sink? But there are means and means. Be goodly therefore: dress ye all in fine apparel; eat rich foods and drink sweet wines and wines that foam! Also, take your fill and will of love as ye will, when, where and with whom ye will! But always unto me.

52. If this be not aright; if ye confound the space-marks, saying: They are one; or saying, They are many; if the ritual be not ever unto me: then expect the direful judgments of Ra Hoor Khuit!

53. This shall regenerate the world, the little world my sister, my heart & my tongue, unto whom I send this kiss. Also, o scribe and prophet, though thou be of the princes, it shall not assuage thee nor absolve thee. But ecstasy be thine and joy of earth: ever To me! To me!

54. Change not as much as the style of a letter; for behold! thou, o prophet, shalt not behold all these mysteries hidden therein.

55. The child of thy bowels, he shall behold them.

56. Expect him not from the East, nor from the West; for from no expected house cometh that child. Aum! All words are sacred and all prophets true; save only that they understand a little; solve the first half of the equation, leave the second unattacked. But thou hast all in the clear light, and some, though not all, in the dark.

57. Invoke me under my stars! Love is the law, love under will. Nor let the fools mistake love; for there are love and love. There is the dove, and there is the serpent. Choose ye well! He, my prophet, hath chosen, knowing the law of the fortress, and the great mystery of the House of God.

All these old letters of my Book are aright; but צ is not the Star. This also is secret: my prophet shall reveal it to the wise.

58. I give unimaginable joys on earth: certainty, not faith, while in life, upon death; peace unutterable, rest, ecstasy; nor do I demand aught in sacrifice.

59. My incense is of resinous woods & gums; and there is no blood therein: because of my hair the trees of Eternity.

60. My number is 11, as all their numbers who are of us. The Five Pointed Star, with a Circle in the Middle, & the circle is Red. My colour is black to the blind, but the blue & gold are seen of the seeing. Also I have a secret glory for them that love me.

61. But to love me is better than all things: if under the night stars in the desert thou presently burnest mine incense before me, invoking me with a pure heart, and the Serpent flame therein, thou shalt come a little to lie in my bosom. For one kiss wilt thou then be willing to give all; but whoso gives one particle of dust shall lose all in that hour. Ye shall gather goods and store of women and spices; ye shall wear rich jewels; ye shall exceed the nations of the earth in splendour & pride; but always in the love of me, and so shall ye come to my joy. I charge you earnestly to come before me in a single robe, and covered with a rich headdress. I love you! I yearn to you! Pale or purple, veiled or voluptuous, I who am all pleasure and purple, and drunkenness of the innermost sense, desire you. Put on the wings, and arouse the coiled splendour within you: come unto me!

62. At all my meetings with you shall the priestess say -- and her eyes shall burn with desire as she stands bare and rejoicing in my secret temple -- To me! To me! calling forth the flame of the hearts of all in her love-chant.

63. Sing the rapturous love-song unto me! Burn to me perfumes! Wear to me jewels! Drink to me, for I love you! I love you!

64. I am the blue-lidded daughter of Sunset; I am the naked brilliance of the voluptuous night-sky.

65. To me! To me!

66. The Manifestation of Nuit is at an end.

Chapter II

1. Nu! the hiding of Hadit.

2. Come! all ye, and learn the secret that hath not yet been revealed. I, Hadit, am the complement of Nu, my bride. I am not extended, and Khabs is the name of my House.

3. In the sphere I am everywhere the centre, as she, the circumference, is nowhere found.

4. Yet she shall be known & I never.

5. Behold! the rituals of the old time are black. Let the evil ones be cast away; let the good ones be purged by the prophet! Then shall this Knowledge go aright.

6. I am the flame that burns in every heart of man, and in the core of every star. I am Life, and the giver of Life, yet therefore is the knowledge of me the knowledge of death.

7. I am the Magician and the Exorcist. I am the axle of the wheel, and the cube in the circle. "Come unto me" is a foolish word: for it is I that go.

8. Who worshipped Heru-pa-kraath have worshipped me; ill, for I am the worshipper.

9. Remember all ye that existence is pure joy; that all the sorrows are but as shadows; they pass & are done; but there is that which remains.

10. O prophet! thou hast ill will to learn this writing.

11. I see thee hate the hand & the pen; but I am stronger.

12. Because of me in Thee which thou knewest not.

13. for why? Because thou wast the knower, and me.

14. Now let there be a veiling of this shrine: now let the light devour men and eat them up with blindness!

15. For I am perfect, being Not; and my number is nine by the fools; but with the just I am eight, and one in eight: Which is vital, for I am none indeed. The Empress and the King are not of me; for there is a further secret.

16. I am The Empress & the Hierophant. Thus eleven, as my bride is eleven.

17. Hear me, ye people of sighing!

The sorrows of pain and regret

Are left to the dead and the dying,

The folk that not know me as yet.

18. These are dead, these fellows; they feel not. We are not for the poor and sad: the lords of the earth are our kinsfolk.

19. Is a God to live in a dog? No! but the highest are of us. They shall rejoice, our chosen: who sorroweth is not of us.

20. Beauty and strength, leaping laughter and delicious languor, force and fire, are of us.

21. We have nothing with the outcast and the unfit: let them die in their misery. For they feel not. Compassion is the vice of kings: stamp down the wretched & the weak: this is the law of the strong: this is our law and the joy of the world. Think not, o king, upon that lie: That Thou Must Die: verily thou shalt not die, but live. Now let it be understood: If the body of the King dissolve, he shall remain in pure ecstasy for ever. Nuit! Hadit! Ra-Hoor-Khuit! The Sun, Strength & Sight, Light; these are for the servants of the Star & the Snake.

22. I am the Snake that giveth Knowledge & Delight and bright glory, and stir the hearts of men with drunkenness. To worship me take wine and strange drugs whereof I will tell my prophet, & be drunk thereof! They shall not harm ye at all. It is a lie, this folly against self. The exposure of innocence is a lie. Be strong, o man! lust, enjoy all things of sense and rapture: fear not that any God shall deny thee for this.

23. I am alone: there is no God where I am.

24. Behold! these be grave mysteries; for there are also of my friends who be hermits. Now think not to find them in the forest or on the mountain; but in beds of purple, caressed by magnificent beasts of women with large limbs, and fire and light in their eyes, and masses of flaming hair about them; there shall ye find them. Ye shall see them at rule, at victorious armies, at all the joy; and there shall be in them a joy a million times greater than this. Beware lest any force another, King against King! Love one another with burning hearts; on the low men trample in the fierce lust of your pride, in the day of your wrath.

25. Ye are against the people, O my chosen!

26. I am the secret Serpent coiled about to spring: in my coiling there is joy. If I lift up my head, I and my Nuit are one. If I droop down mine head, and shoot forth venom, then is rapture of the earth, and I and the earth are one.

27. There is great danger in me; for who doth not understand these runes shall make a great miss. He shall fall down into the pit called Because, and there he shall perish with the dogs of Reason.

28. Now a curse upon Because and his kin!

29. May Because be accursèd for ever!

30. If Will stops and cries Why, invoking Because, then Will stops & does nought.

31. If Power asks why, then is Power weakness.

32. Also reason is a lie; for there is a factor infinite & unknown; & all their words are skew-wise.

33. Enough of Because! Be he damned for a dog!

34. But ye, o my people, rise up & awake!

35. Let the rituals be rightly performed with joy & beauty!

36. There are rituals of the elements and feasts of the times.

37. A feast for the first night of the Prophet and his Bride!

38. A feast for the three days of the writing of the Book of the Law.

39. A feast for Tahuti and the child of the Prophet--secret, O Prophet!

40. A feast for the Supreme Ritual, and a feast for the Equinox of the Gods.

41. A feast for fire and a feast for water; a feast for life and a greater feast for death!

42. A feast every day in your hearts in the joy of my rapture!

43. A feast every night unto Nu, and the pleasure of uttermost delight!

44. Aye! feast! rejoice! there is no dread hereafter. There is the dissolution, and eternal ecstasy in the kisses of Nu.

45. There is death for the dogs.

46. Dost thou fail? Art thou sorry? Is fear in thine heart?

47. Where I am these are not.

48. Pity not the fallen! I never knew them. I am not for them. I console not: I hate the consoled & the consoler.

49. I am unique & conqueror. I am not of the slaves that perish. Be they damned & dead! Amen. (This is of the 4: there is a fifth who is invisible, & therein am I as a babe in an egg.)

50. Blue am I and gold in the light of my bride: but the red gleam is in my eyes; & my spangles are purple & green.

51. Purple beyond purple: it is the light higher than eyesight.

52. There is a veil: that veil is black. It is the veil of the modest woman; it is the veil of sorrow, & the pall of death: this is none of me. Tear down that lying spectre of the centuries: veil not your vices in virtuous words: these vices are my service; ye do well, & I will reward you here and hereafter.

53. Fear not, o prophet, when these words are said, thou shalt not be sorry. Thou art emphatically my chosen; and blessed are the eyes that thou shalt look upon with gladness. But I will hide thee in a mask of sorrow: they that see thee shall fear thou art fallen: but I lift thee up.

54. Nor shall they who cry aloud their folly that thou meanest nought avail; thou shall reveal it: thou availest: they are the slaves of because: They are not of me. The stops as thou wilt; the letters? change them not in style or value!

55. Thou shalt obtain the order & value of the English Alphabet; thou shalt find new symbols to attribute them unto.

56. Begone! ye mockers; even though ye laugh in my honour ye shall laugh not long: then when ye are sad know that I have forsaken you.

57. He that is righteous shall be righteous still; he that is filthy shall be filthy still.

58. Yea! deem not of change: ye shall be as ye are, & not other. Therefore the kings of the earth shall be Kings for ever: the slaves shall serve. There is none that shall be cast down or lifted up: all is ever as it was. Yet there are masked ones my servants: it may be that yonder beggar is a King. A King may choose his garment as he will: there is no certain test: but a beggar cannot hide his poverty.

59. Beware therefore! Love all, lest perchance is a King concealed! Say you so? Fool! If he be a King, thou canst not hurt him.

60. Therefore strike hard & low, and to hell with them, master!

61. There is a light before thine eyes, o prophet, a light undesired, most desirable.

62. I am uplifted in thine heart; and the kisses of the stars rain hard upon thy body.

63. Thou art exhaust in the voluptuous fullness of the inspiration; the expiration is sweeter than death, more rapid and laughterful than a caress of Hell's own worm.

64. Oh! thou art overcome: we are upon thee; our delight is all over thee: hail! hail: prophet of Nu! prophet of Had! prophet of Ra-Hoor-Khu! Now rejoice! now come in our splendour & rapture! Come in our passionate peace, & write sweet words for the Kings.

65. I am the Master: thou art the Holy Chosen One.

66. Write, & find ecstasy in writing! Work, & be our bed in working! Thrill with the joy of life & death! Ah! thy death shall be lovely: whoso seeth it shall be glad. Thy death shall be the seal of the promise of our age long love. Come! lift up thine heart & rejoice! We are one; we are none.

67. Hold! Hold! Bear up in thy rapture; fall not in swoon of the excellent kisses!

68. Harder! Hold up thyself! Lift thine head! breathe not so deep -- die!

69. Ah! Ah! What do I feel? Is the word exhausted?

70. There is help & hope in other spells. Wisdom says: be strong! Then canst thou bear more joy. Be not animal; refine thy rapture! If thou drink, drink by the eight and ninety rules of art: if thou love, exceed by delicacy; and if thou do aught joyous, let there be subtlety therein!

71. But exceed! exceed!

72. Strive ever to more! and if thou art truly mine -- and doubt it not, an if thou art ever joyous! -- death is the crown of all.

73. Ah! Ah! Death! Death! thou shalt long for death. Death is forbidden, o man, unto thee.

74. The length of thy longing shall be the strength of its glory. He that lives long & desires death much is ever the King among the Kings.

75. Aye! listen to the numbers & the words:

76. 4 6 3 8 A B K 2 4 A L G M O R 3 Y X 24 89 R P S T O V A L. What meaneth this, o prophet? Thou knowest not; nor shalt thou know ever. There cometh one to follow thee: he shall expound it. But remember, o chosen one, to be me; to follow the love of Nu in the star-lit heaven; to look forth upon men, to tell them this glad word.

77. O be thou proud and mighty among men!

78. Lift up thyself! for there is none like unto thee among men or among Gods! Lift up thyself, o my prophet, thy stature shall surpass the stars. They shall worship thy name, foursquare, mystic, wonderful, the number of the man; and the name of thy house 418.

79. The end of the hiding of Hadit; and blessing & worship to the prophet of the lovely Star!

Chapter III

1. Abrahadabra; the reward of Ra Hoor Khut.

2. There is division hither homeward; there is a word not known. Spelling is defunct; all is not aught. Beware! Hold! Raise the spell of Ra-Hoor-Khuit!

3. Now let it be first understood that I am a god of War and of Vengeance. I shall deal hardly with them.

4. Choose ye an island!

5. Fortify it!

6. Dung it about with enginery of war!

7. I will give you a war-engine.

8. With it ye shall smite the peoples; and none shall stand before you.

9. Lurk! Withdraw! Upon them! this is the Law of the Battle of Conquest: thus shall my worship be about my secret house.

10. Get the stele of revealing itself; set it in thy secret temple -- and that temple is already aright disposed -- & it shall be your Kiblah for ever. It shall not fade, but miraculous colour shall come back to it day after day. Close it in locked glass for a proof to the world.

11. This shall be your only proof. I forbid argument. Conquer! That is enough. I will make easy to you the abstruction from the ill-ordered house in the Victorious City. Thou shalt thyself convey it with worship, o prophet, though thou likest it not. Thou shalt have danger & trouble. Ra-Hoor-Khu is with thee. Worship me with fire & blood; worship me with swords & with spears. Let the woman be girt with a sword before me: let blood flow to my name. Trample down the Heathen; be upon them, o warrior, I will give you of their flesh to eat!

12. Sacrifice cattle, little and big: after a child.

13. But not now.

14. Ye shall see that hour, o blessed Beast, and thou the Scarlet Concubine of his desire!

15. Ye shall be sad thereof.

16. Deem not too eagerly to catch the promises; fear not to undergo the curses. Ye, even ye, know not this meaning all.

17. Fear not at all; fear neither men nor Fates, nor gods, nor anything. Money fear not, nor laughter of the folk folly, nor any other power in heaven or upon the earth or under the earth. Nu is your refuge as Hadit your light; and I am the strength, force, vigour, of your arms.

18. Mercy let be off; damn them who pity! Kill and torture; spare not; be upon them!

19. That stele they shall call the Abomination of Desolation; count well its name, & it shall be to you as 718.

20. Why? Because of the fall of Because, that he is not there again.

21. Set up my image in the East: thou shalt buy thee an image which I will show thee, especial, not unlike the one thou knowest. And it shall be suddenly easy for thee to do this.

22. The other images group around me to support me: let all be worshipped, for they shall cluster to exalt me. I am the visible object of worship; the others are secret; for the Beast & his Bride are they: and for the winners of the Ordeal x. What is this? Thou shalt know.

23. For perfume mix meal & honey & thick leavings of red wine: then oil of Abramelin and olive oil, and afterward soften & smooth down with rich fresh blood.

24. The best blood is of the moon, monthly: then the fresh blood of a child, or dropping from the host of heaven: then of enemies; then of the priest or of the worshippers: last of some beast, no matter what.

25. This burn: of this make cakes & eat unto me. This hath also another use; let it be laid before me, and kept thick with perfumes of your orison: it shall become full of beetles as it were and creeping things sacred unto me.

26. These slay, naming your enemies; & they shall fall before you.

27. Also these shall breed lust & power of lust in you at the eating thereof.

28. Also ye shall be strong in war.

29. Moreover, be they long kept, it is better; for they swell with my force. All before me.

30. My altar is of open brass work: burn thereon in silver or gold!

31. There cometh a rich man from the West who shall pour his gold upon thee.

32. From gold forge steel!

33. Be ready to fly or to smite!

34. But your holy place shall be untouched throughout the centuries: though with fire and sword it be burnt down & shattered, yet an invisible house there standeth, and shall stand until the fall of the Great Equinox; when Hrumachis shall arise and the double-wanded one assume my throne and place. Another prophet shall arise, and bring fresh fever from the skies; another woman shall awakethe lust & worship of the Snake; another soul of God and beast shall mingle in the globed priest; another sacrifice shall stain the tomb; another king shall reign; and blessing no longer be poured To the Hawk-headed mystical Lord!

35. The half of the word of Heru-ra-ha, called Hoor-pa-kraat and Ra-Hoor-Khut.

36. Then said the prophet unto the God:

37. I adore thee in the song -- I am the Lord of Thebes, and I The inspired forth-speaker of Mentu; For me unveils the veiled sky, The self-slain Ankh-af-na-khonsu Whose words are truth. I invoke, I greet Thy presence, O Ra-Hoor-Khuit!

Unity uttermost showed! I adore the might of Thy breath, Supreme and terrible God, Who makest the gods and death To tremble before Thee: -- I, I adore thee!

Appear on the throne of Ra! Open the ways of the Khu! Lighten the ways of the Ka! The ways of the Khabs run through To stir me or still me! Aum! let it fill me!

38. So that thy light is in me; & its red flame is as a sword in my hand to push thy order. There is a secret door that I shall make to establish thy way in all the quarters, (these are the adorations, as thou hast written), as it is said:

The light is mine; its rays consume Me: I have made a secret door Into the House of Ra and Tum, Of Khephra and of Ahathoor. I am thy Theban, O Mentu, The prophet Ankh-af-na-khonsu!

By Bes-na-Maut my breast I beat; By wise Ta-Nech I weave my spell. Show thy star-splendour, O Nuit! Bid me within thine House to dwell, O winged snake of light, Hadit! Abide with me, Ra-Hoor-Khuit!

39. All this and a book to say how thou didst come hither and a reproduction of this ink and paper for ever -- for in it is the word secret & not only in the English -- and thy comment upon this the Book of the Law shall be printed beautifully in red ink and black upon beautiful paper made by hand; and to each man and woman that thou meetest, were it but to dine or to drink at them, it is the Law to give. Then they shall chance to abide in this bliss or no; it is no odds. Do this quickly!

40. But the work of the comment? That is easy; and Hadit burning in thy heart shall make swift and secure thy pen.

41. Establish at thy Kaaba a clerk-house: all must be done well and with business way.

42. The ordeals thou shalt oversee thyself, save only the blind ones. Refuse none, but thou shalt know & destroy the traitors. I am Ra-Hoor-Khuit; and I am powerful to protect my servant. Success is thy proof: argue not; convert not; talk not over much! Them that seek to entrap thee, to overthrow thee, them attack without pity or quarter; & destroy them utterly. Swift as a trodden serpent turn and strike! Be thou yet deadlier than he! Drag down their souls to awful torment: laugh at their fear: spit upon them!

43. Let the Scarlet Woman beware! If pity and compassion and tenderness visit her heart; if she leave my work to toy with old sweetnesses; then shall my vengeance be known. I will slay me her child: I will alienate her heart: I will cast her out from men: as a shrinking and despised harlot shall she crawl through dusk wet streets, and die cold and an-hungered.

44. But let her raise herself in pride! Let her follow me in my way! Let her work the work of wickedness! Let her kill her heart! Let her be loud and adulterous! Let her be covered with jewels, and rich garments, and let her be shameless before all men!

45. Then will I lift her to pinnacles of power: then will I breed from her a child mightier than all the kings of the earth. I will fill her with joy: with my force shall she see & strike at the worship of Nu: she shall achieve Hadit.

46. I am the warrior Lord of the Forties: the Eighties cower before me, & are abased. I will bring you to victory & joy: I will be at your arms in battle & ye shall delight to slay. Success is your proof; courage is your armour; go on, go on, in my strength; & ye shall turn not back for any!

47. This book shall be translated into all tongues: but always with the original in the writing of the Beast; for in the chance shape of the letters and their position to one another: in these are mysteries that no Beast shall divine. Let him not seek to try: but one cometh after him, whence I say not, who shall discover the Key of it all. Then this line drawn is a key: then this circle squared in its failure is a key also. And Abrahadabra. It shall be his child & that strangely. Let him not seek after this; for thereby alone can he fall from it.

48. Now this mystery of the letters is done, and I want to go on to the holier place.

49. I am in a secret fourfold word, the blasphemy against all gods of men.

50. Curse them! Curse them! Curse them!

51. With my Hawk's head I peck at the eyes of Jesus as he hangs upon the cross.

52. I flap my wings in the face of Mohammed & blind him.

53. With my claws I tear out the flesh of the Indian and the Buddhist, Mongol and Din.

54. Bahlasti! Ompehda! I spit on your crapulous creeds.

55. Let Mary inviolate be torn upon wheels: for her sake let all chaste women be utterly despised among you!

56. Also for beauty's sake and love's!

57. Despise also all cowards; professional soldiers who dare not fight, but play; all fools despise!

58. But the keen and the proud, the royal and the lofty; ye are brothers!

59. As brothers fight ye!

60. There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.

61. There is an end of the word of the God enthroned in Ra's seat, lightening the girders of the soul.

62. To Me do ye reverence! to me come ye through tribulation of ordeal, which is bliss.

63. The fool readeth this Book of the Law, and its comment; & he understandeth it not.

64. Let him come through the first ordeal, & it will be to him as silver.

65. Through the second, gold.

66. Through the third, stones of precious water.

67. Through the fourth, ultimate sparks of the intimate fire.

68. Yet to all it shall seem beautiful. Its enemies who say not so, are mere liars.

69. There is success.

70. I am the Hawk-Headed Lord of Silence & of Strength; my nemyss shrouds the night-blue sky.

71. Hail! ye twin warriors about the pillars of the world! for your time is nigh at hand.

72. I am the Lord of the Double Wand of Power; the wand of the Force of Coph Nia--but my left hand is empty, for I have crushed an Universe; & nought remains.

73. Paste the sheets from right to left and from top to bottom: then behold!

74. There is a splendour in my name hidden and glorious, as the sun of midnight is ever the son.

75. The ending of the words is the Word Abrahadabra.

The Book of the Law is Written and Concealed.

Aum. Ha.

THE COMMENT

Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the Law.

The study of this Book is forbidden. It is wise to destroy this copy after the first reading.

Whosoever disregards this does so at his own risk and peril. These are most dire.

Those who discuss the contents of this Book are to be shunned by all, as centres of pestilence.

All questions of the Law are to be decided only by appeal to my writings, each for himself.

There is no law beyond Do what thou wilt.

Love is the law, love under will.

The priest of the princes,

Ankh-f-n-khonsu

